IntroductionWhy do we need guidelines on valvular heartdisease?Although valvular heart disease (VHD) is less common inindustrialized countries than coronary disease, heartfailure, or hypertension, guidelines are of interest in thisﬁeld for several reasons:VHD is common and often requires intervention.Substantial advances have been made in the understanding of its pathophysiology.In recent years, the patient population has changed. The continuous decline of acute rheumatic fever owing to better prophylaxis of streptococcus infections explains the decrease inthe incidence of rheumatic valve disease, whereas increasedlife expectancy partially accounts for the increase in the incidence of degenerative valvular diseases in industrializedcountries. The incidence of endocarditis remains stable andother causes of valve disease are rare.2,3 Because of the predominance of degenerative valve disease, the two most frequent valve diseases are now calciﬁc aortic stenosis (AS) andmitral regurgitation (MR), whereas aortic regurgitation (AR)and mitral stenosis (MS) have become less common.3 Olderage is associated with a higher frequency of comorbidity,which contributes to increased operative risk and rendersdecision-making for intervention more complex. Anotherimportant aspect of contemporary heart valve disease isthe growing proportion of previously operated patients whopresent with further problems.3 Conversely, rheumaticvalve disease still remains a major public health problem indeveloping countries, where it predominantly affects youngadults.4 However, rheumatic heart disease is still present inindustrialized countries owing to immigration and sequelaeof rheumatic fever in older patients.Diagnosis is now dominated by echocardiography, whichhas become the standard to evaluate valve structure andfunction.Treatment has not only developed through the continuingprogress in prosthetic valve technology, but has also beenreoriented by the development of conservative surgicalapproaches and the introduction of percutaneous interventional techniques.When compared with other heart diseases, there are fewtrials in the ﬁeld of VHD, and randomized clinical trials areparticularly scarce.The same is true with guidelines: there is only one set ofguidelines in the ﬁeld of VHD in the USA5 and four nationalguidelines in Europe.6–9 Moreover, published guidelines arenot always consistent due to the lack of randomized clinicaltrials as well as the constant evolution of practice. Finally,data from the recent Euro Heart Survey on VHD show thatthere is a real gap between the existing guidelines andtheir effective application.3It is for this reason that the ESC has produced these guidelines, which are the ﬁrst European guidelines on this topic.Contents of these guidelinesThe guidelines focus on VHD in adults and adolescents, areoriented towards management, and will not deal with endocarditis and congenital valve diseases in adults andadolescents, since recent guidelines have been producedby the ESC on these topics.10,11 Finally, these guidelinesare not intended to include detailed information coveredin  on other topics, ESC Expert ConsensusDocuments, recommendations from the working group onVHD, and the speciﬁc sections of the ESC Textbook onCardiology.12–15be perceived as real or potential conﬂicts of interest. Thesedisclosure forms are kept on ﬁle at the European HeartHouse, headquarters of the ESC, and can be made availableby written request to the ESC President. Any changes in conﬂict of interest that arise during the writing period must benotiﬁed to the ESC.Guidelines and recommendations are presented informats that are easy to interpret. They should help physicians make clinical decisions in their daily routine practice by describing the range of generally acceptableapproaches to diagnosis and treatment. However, the ultimate judgement regarding the care of an individualpatient must be made by the physician in charge of thepatient’s care.The ESC Committee for Practice Guidelines (CPG) supervises and coordinates the preparation of new Guidelinesand Expert Consensus Documents produced by Task Forces,expert groups, or consensus panels. The Committee is alsoresponsible for the endorsement of these Guidelines andExpert Consensus Documents or statements.Once the document has been ﬁnalized and approved by allthe experts involved in the Task Force, it is submitted tooutside specialists for review. In some cases, the documentcan be presented to a panel of key opinion leaders inEurope, specialists in the relevant condition in question,for discussion and critical review. If necessary, the documentis revised once more and ﬁnally approved by the CPG andselected members of the Board of the ESC and subsequentlypublished.After publication, dissemination of the message is ofparamount importance. Publication of executive summariesand the production of pocket-sized and PDA-downloadableversions of the recommendations are helpful. However,surveys have shown that the intended end-users are oftennot aware of the existence of guidelines or simply do notput them into practice. Implementation programmes arethus necessary and form an important component of the dissemination of knowledge. Meetings are organized by the ESCand directed towards its member National Societies and keyopinion leaders in Europe. Implementation meetings canalso be undertaken at a national level, once the guidelineshave been endorsed by the ESC member societies, and translated into the local language, when necessary.All in all, the task of writing Guidelines or ExpertConsensus Document covers not only the integration ofthe most recent research, but also the creation of educational tools, and implementation programmes for the recommendations. The loop between clinical research, writingof guidelines, and implementing them into clinical practicecan then only be completed if surveys and registries areorganized to verify that actual clinical practice is inkeeping with what is recommended in the guidelines. Suchsurveys and registries also make it possible to check theimpact of strict implementation of the guidelines onpatient outcome.Patient evaluationThe committee emphasizes the fact that many factors ultimately determine the most appropriate treatment in individual patients within a given community. These factorsinclude availability of diagnostic equipment, the expertiseof interventional cardiologists and surgeons, especially inthe ﬁeld of conservative techniques, and, notably, thewishes of well-informed patients. Furthermore, owing tothe lack of evidence-based data in the ﬁeld of VHD, mostrecommendations are largely the result of expert consensusopinion. Therefore, deviations from these guidelines may beappropriate in certain clinical circumstances.Diagnosis and evaluation of the severity of VHD should bebased on the combined analysis of clinical ﬁndings and theresults of investigations.Method of reviewA literature review was performed using Medline (PubMed)for peer-reviewed published literature focusing on thestudies published within the last 10 years. The use ofabstracts was avoided in these guidelines.Deﬁnition of levels of recommendationThe Task Force has classiﬁed and ranked the usefulness orefﬁcacy of the recommended procedures and/or treatmentsand the level of evidence as indicated in Table 1. The levelsof recommendation were graded on the basis of the ESC recommendations.1 Unlike in the ACC/AHA levels of recommendation, class III (‘conditions for which there is evidence and/or general agreement that the procedure is not useful/effective and in some cases may be harmful’) is usuallynot used in the .General commentsThe aims of the evaluation of patients with VHD are to diagnose, quantify, and assess the mechanism of VHD as well asits consequences. The consistency between the results ofinvestigations and clinical ﬁndings should be checked ateach step. Indications for interventions rely mainly on thecomparative assessment of spontaneous prognosis and theresults of intervention according to the characteristics ofVHD and comorbidities.Evidence and/or general agreement thata given treatment or procedureis beneﬁcial, useful, and effectiveConﬂicting evidence and/or a divergenceof opinion about the usefulness/efﬁcacyof a given treatment or procedureWeight of evidence/opinion is infavour of usefulness/efﬁcacyUsefulness/efﬁcacy is less well establishedby evidence/opinionData derived from multiple randomizedclinical trials or meta-analysesData derived from a single randomizedclinical trial or large non-randomized studiesConsensus of opinion of the experts and/orsmall studies, retrospective studies,registriesClinical evaluationThe aim of analysing case history is to assess present andpast symptoms, as well as looking for associated comorbidity. The patient is questioned on her/his lifestyle to detectprogressive changes in the daily activity in order to limitthe subjectivity of symptom analysis, in particular, in theelderly.13 Questioning the patient is also important tocheck the quality of follow-up, the effectiveness of prophylaxis of endocarditis and, where applicable, of rheumaticfever. In patients receiving chronic anticoagulant therapy,it is necessary to assess the stability of anticoagulationand look for thrombo-embolism or bleeding.Clinical examination plays a major role in the detection ofVHD in asymptomatic patients. It is the ﬁrst step in the diagnosis of VHD and the assessment of its severity. In patientswith a heart valve prosthesis, it is necessary to be awareof any change in murmur or prosthetic sounds.An electrocardiogram (ECG) and chest X-ray are usuallycarried out alongside clinical examination. Besides cardiacenlargement, analysis of pulmonary vascularization on thechest X-ray is useful when interpreting dyspnoea or clinicalsigns of heart failure.16EchocardiographyIn addition to clinical ﬁndings, echocardiography is the keytechnique to conﬁrm the diagnosis of VHD, as well as toassess its severity and prognosis. It is indicated in anypatient with a murmur when valve disease is suspected,the only possible exception being young patients who onlyhave a trivial (grade 1/6) mid-systolic murmur.The evaluation of the severity of stenotic VHD shouldcombine the assessment of valve area and ﬂow-dependentindices such as mean gradient and/or maximal ﬂow velocity.17 Flow-dependent indices such as mean gradient ormaximal ﬂow velocity add further information and have aprognostic The assessment of valvular regurgitation should combinedifferent indices including quantitative  echocardiography, such as the effective regurgitant oriﬁce area (ERO),which is less dependent on ﬂow conditions than colourDoppler jet size.19 However, all quantitative evaluations,such as the continuity equation or ﬂow convergence, havelimitations. In particular, they combine a number ofmeasurements and are highly sensitive to errors of measurement; therefore, their use requires experience.Thus, when assessing the severity of VHD, it is necessaryto check consistency between the different echocardiographic measurements as well as with the anatomy andmechanisms of VHD. It is also necessary to check theirconsistency with clinical assessment. In Table 2, this isillustrated as it applies to the quantiﬁcation of severeregurgitation.Echocardiography should include a comprehensive evaluation of all valves, looking for associated valve diseasesand that of the ascending aorta.Indices of left ventricular (LV) enlargement and functionare strong prognostic factors in AR and MR and, thus,In the absence of other aetiologies of LV and LA dilatation and acute MR.Adapted from Zoghbi et al.19play an important role in decision-making. It is alsoimportant to index LV dimensions to body surface area(BSA) to take into account patient’s body size. However,the validity of indexed values is uncertain for extremebody size.Transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) should be considered when transthoracic examination is of suboptimalquality or when thrombosis, prosthetic dysfunction, or endocarditis is suspected. It should be performed intraoperatively to monitor the results of valve repair or complexprocedures.Three-dimensional echocardiography is a promising technique, particularly for the evaluation of valve anatomy.However, its incremental usefulness in decision-making hasnot been validated so far.with valvular regurgitation, in particular, when echocardiographic examination is of suboptimal quality.20Stress testingExercise electrocardiogramThe primary purpose of exercise testing is to unmask theobjective occurrence of symptoms in patients who claimto be asymptomatic. In truly asymptomatic patients, it hasan additional value for risk stratiﬁcation in AS.21,22Exercise testing will also determine the level of authorizedphysical activity, including participation in sports.23FluoroscopyFluoroscopy can be used to assess annular or valvular calciﬁcation, as it enables calciﬁcation to be distinguished fromﬁbrosis with a higher speciﬁcity than echocardiography.Fluoroscopy is also useful to assess the kinetics of themobile part of a mechanical prosthesis.Exercise echocardiographyPromising recent reports suggest that the estimation of theprognosis of VHD and indications for intervention may bereﬁned by measuring changes in gradients or degree ofregurgitation on exercise.24,25 Echocardiography performedimmediately after exercise has shown to be useful toassess the prognosis of degenerative MR.26 However, thesepreliminary ﬁndings need to be conﬁrmed before this canbe recommended in practice.Radionuclide angiographyRadionuclide angiography provides a reproducible evaluation of LV ejection fraction (EF) in patients in sinusrhythm. This aids decision-making in asymptomatic patientsOther stress testsLow-dose dobutamine stress echocardiography is useful inAS with impaired LV function.27 The use of stress tests todetect coronary artery disease associated with severe VHDis discouraged because of their low diagnostic value.Other non-invasive imaging techniquesComputed tomographyPreliminary data show that computed tomography (CT) scanning enables valve calciﬁcation to be accurately quantiﬁedwith good reproducibility. Valve calciﬁcation is linked tothe severity of VHD and provides additional prognostic information.28 In expert centres, multislice CT can be useful toexclude coronary artery disease in patients who are at lowrisk of atherosclerosis.BiomarkersNatriuretic peptide serum level, in particular, of the B-type,has been shown to be related to functional class and prognosis, particularly in AS and MR.30,31 However, data regardingtheir incremental value in risk-stratiﬁcation so far remainlimited.Coronary angiographyCoronary angiography is widely indicated to detect associated coronary artery disease when surgery is planned(Table 3). Knowledge of coronary anatomy improvesrisk-stratiﬁcation and determines whether coronary revascularization is indicated in association with valvular surgery.Coronary angiography can be omitted in young patientswith no risk factors and in rare circumstances when its riskoutweighs beneﬁt, e.g. in acute aortic dissection, a largeaortic vegetation in front of coronary ostia, or occlusiveprosthetic thrombosis leading to an unstable haemodynamiccondition.Cardiac catheterizationThe measurement of pressures and cardiac output, or theperformance of ventricular angiography, is restricted tosituations where non-invasive evaluation is inconclusiveAssessment of comorbidityThe choice of speciﬁc examinations to assess comorbidity isdirected by the clinical evaluation. The most frequentlyencountered are peripheral atherosclerosis, renal failure,and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.3Endocarditis prophylaxisEndocarditis prophylaxis should be considered in any patientwith VHD and adapted to the individual patient risk.10Risk stratiﬁcationThe Euro Heart Survey has shown that, in current practice,there is general agreement between the decision tooperate and the existing guidelines in asymptomaticpatients. However, in patients with severe symptoms, intervention is underused for reasons that are often unjustiﬁed.3,33 This stresses the importance of the widespreaduse of careful risk stratiﬁcation.In the absence of evidence from randomized clinicaltrials, the decision to intervene in a patient with VHDrelies on an individual risk–beneﬁt analysis, suggestingthat improvement of prognosis compared with naturalhistory outweighs the risk of intervention and its potentiallate consequences, in particular, prosthesis-relatedcomplications.The evaluation of the prognosis of VHD depends on thetype of VHD and is derived from studies on natural history,which are frequently old and not always applicable tocurrent presentations of VHD. Only a few contemporarystudies enable spontaneous prognosis to be assessed according to patient characteristics.34Factors predicting operative mortality have been identiﬁed from large series of patients undergoing cardiacsurgery or, more speciﬁcally, heart valve surgery.35–39 Theyare related to heart disease, the patient’s age, comorbidity,and the type of surgery. The easiest way to integrate theweight of the different predictable factors is to combinethem in multivariate scores, enabling operative mortalityto be estimated. The Euroscore (Table 4) is widely used inthis setting. Although it has been elaborated for cardiacsurgery in general, it has been validated in valvularsurgery.35,39 One recent analysis of a database from the UKled to a simple scoring system, which has been speciﬁcallyelaborated and validated in patients operated on forVHD.37 However, no scoring systems enable the spontaneousoutcome to be assessed.Despite limitations and the need for further validation,the use of these scores reduces the subjectivity of the evaluation of the operative risk and, thus, of the risk–beneﬁtratio. Of course, this is only one of the elements in decisionmaking, which should also take into account the patient’slife expectancy, quality of life, wishes, as well as localresources, in particular, the availability of valve repair andsurgical outcome in the speciﬁed centre. Finally, very importantly, the decision to intervene should take into accountthe decision of the patient and the relatives after theyMagnetic resonance imagingAt present, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is not indicated in VHD in routine clinical practice; however, mostmeasurements usually acquired by  echocardiography can also be acquired with MRI and thus MRI can beused as an alternative technique when echocardiography isnot feasible. In particular, quantiﬁcation of cardiac function, dimensions, and regurgitant volume is very accuratewith MRI.29or discordant with clinical ﬁndings. Given its potentialrisks, cardiac catheterization to assess haemodynamicsshould not be systematically associated with coronaryangiography, although this remains common in currentpractice.3,32CABG ¼ coronary artery bypass grafting, LV ¼ left ventricular, EF ¼ ejection fraction, MI ¼ myocardial infarction.The estimation of the operative mortality for a given patient can be obtained using a calculator accessible at http://www.euroscore.org/calc.html.From Roques et  issues in AR are as follows:Echocardiography is the key examination, its aim being to:have been thoroughly informed of the risks and beneﬁts ofthe different therapeutic possibilities.Aortic regurgitationIntroductionAR may be the consequence of diverse aetiologies, the distribution of which has changed over time. The most frequentcauses of AR are now those related to aortic root diseaseand bicuspid aortic valve. The inherent consequence is thefrequent involvement of the ascending aorta,2,3 which mayneed surgical treatment.EvaluationInitial examination should include a detailed clinicalevaluation. AR is diagnosed by the presence of a diastolicmurmur. Exaggerated arterial pulsations and low diastolicpressure represent the ﬁrst and main clinical signsfor quantifying AR.15 Peripheral signs are attenuatedin acute AR, which contrasts with a poor functionaltolerance.Diagnose and quantify the severity of AR, using colourDoppler (extension or, better, width of regurgitant jet) andcontinuous-wave  (rate of decline of aortic regurgitant ﬂow and holodiastolic ﬂow reversal in the descendingaorta). All these indices are inﬂuenced by loading conditionsand the compliance of the ascending aorta and the LV.Quantitative Doppler echocardiography, using the continuityequation or analysis of proximal isovelocity surface area, isless sensitive to loading conditions. The criteria for deﬁningsevere AR are described in Table 2.19 The evaluation of severity, using quantitative measurements, is less well establishedthan in MR, and consequently, the results of quantitativemeasurements should be integrated with other data tocome to a ﬁnal conclusion as regards severity.Assess the mechanisms of regurgitation, describe the valveanatomy, and determine the feasibility of valve repair.Image the aorta at four different levels: annulus, sinusesof Valsalva, sino-tubular junction, and ascending aorta.40Indexing for BSA could be recommended, especially inpatients of small body size and women.41Evaluate LV function. LV dimensions should also be indexedas described earlier.42Natural historyPatients with acute AR have a poor prognosis without intervention owing to the signiﬁcant increase in diastolic LVpressure, leading to poor haemodynamic tolerance. Thereis little information in the literature on the progressionfrom mild to severe AR. Patients with severe AR and symptoms have a poor prognosis.43In asymptomatic patients with severe AR and normal LVfunction, the number of events during follow-up is low:development of asymptomatic LV dysfunction, ,1.3% peryear; sudden death, ,0.2% per year; and symptoms, LVimpairment, or death, 4.3% per year. Age, end-systolicdiameter or volume, and EF at rest are predictorsof outcome. On multivariate analysis, age and endsystolic diameter, when it is .50 , predict a pooroutcome.43–46 Recent data suggest that it could be moreappropriate to use thresholds related to BSA and the proposed value is an end-systolic diameter .25 mm/m2 BSA.42The natural history of aortic root aneurysm has beenmainly studied in patients with Marfan’s syndrome. Thestrongest predictors of complication are the diameter ofthe aortic root at the level of the sinuses of Valsalva andthe presence of a family history of cardiovascular events(aortic dissection, sudden cardiac death).40,47–49 When theaorta has reached 6 cm in size, yearly rates of rupture, dissection, and death are, respectively, 3.6, 3.7, and 10.8%.There is a rising incidence of dissection or rupture withthe increase in aneurysm size.47–49 Recent data usingindexed values show a 4, 8, and .20% risk of complications,respectively, when the measurements are 2.75, 2.75–4.24,and .4.25 cm/m2.41 Patients with bicuspid valves50 mayalso present a rapid progression rate. Less information isavailable for other aetiologies such as annulo-aortic ectasia.Results of surgerySurgical treatment of AR is aortic valve replacement whenthere is no associated aortic aneurysm. When an aneurysmof the aortic root is associated, surgery also comprises replacement of the ascending aorta with re-implantation of thecoronary arteries, combined with either replacement ofthe valve or valve-sparing techniques. In current practice,valve replacement remains the standard and the other procedures are performed in only a small percentage ofpatients. Supra-coronary replacement of ascending aortacan be performed when Valsalva sinuses are preserved.CABG ¼ coronary artery bypass grafting.STS ¼ Society of Thoracic Surgeons (USA). Mortality for STS includesﬁrst and redo interventions.51 UKCSR ¼ United Kingdom Cardiac SurgicalRegister. Mortality for UKCSR corresponds to ﬁrst interventions only.52EHS ¼ Euro Heart Survey.3 CABG ¼ coronary artery bypass grafting.Operative mortality is low (1–3%)3,43,51,52 (Table 5) inasymptomatic patients submitted to isolated aortic valvesurgery. In symptomatic patients, in patients with combinedaortic valve and root surgery, and in patients withconcomitant coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG),operative mortality ranges from 3 to 7%. The strongest preoperative predictors of heart failure or death after surgeryare age, preoperative functional class, resting EF ,50% orshortening fraction ,25%, and LV end-systolic diameter.55 mm.43–45,53–56Immediate and late results of the replacement of theascending aorta, using a composite graft, are excellent inMarfan’s syndrome when performed by experienced teamson an elective basis.40,57 Data on conservative surgery aremore limited and come from expert centres. In such settings, recent series have reported an operative mortalityof 1.6%, 10 year survival of 88%, freedom from aortic valvereplacement of 99%, and freedom from at least moderateAR of 83%.58,59Indications for surgeryIn symptomatic acute AR, urgent intervention is indicated.In chronic AR, the goals of the operation are to improveoutcome, to diminish symptoms, to prevent the development of postoperative heart failure and cardiac death,and to avoid aortic complications in patients who presentwith aortic aneurysm.46,60On the basis of robust observational evidence, recommended surgical indications are as follows (Table 6, Figure 1):Symptom onset is an indication for surgery.  shouldnot be denied in symptomatic patients with LV dysfunctionor marked LV dilatation after careful exclusion of otherpossible causes. Although in these patients postoperativeoutcome is worse than in patients operated at an earlierstage, acceptable operative mortality, improvement ofTEE may be performed to better deﬁne the anatomy ofthe valve and ascending aorta, especially when valvesparing intervention is considered.At the present time, clinical decisions should not be basedon changes in EF on exercise, nor on data from stress echocardiography because these indices, although potentiallyinteresting, have not been adequately validated.When available, MRI can be used to assess the severity ofregurgitation and LV function, particularly when echocardiographic images are of poor quality.MRI or CT scanning, according to availability and expertise, is recommended for the evaluation of the aorta inpatients with an enlarged aorta as detected by echocardiography, especially in cases of bicuspid valves or Marfan’ssyndrome.Severity is deﬁned from clinical and echocardiographic assessment (seetext).In asymptomatic patients, repeated and high-quality measures arenecessary before surgery.AR ¼ aortic regurgitation, BSA ¼ body surface area, CABG ¼ coronaryartery bypass grafting, ESD ¼ end-systolic dimension, EF ¼ ejection fraction, LV ¼ left ventricular.aPatient’s stature should be considered. Indexing is helpful. Changes insequential measurements should be taken into account.bDecision should take into account the shape and thickness of ascendingaorta as well as the shape of the other parts of aorta.For patients who have an indication for surgery on the aortic valve,lower thresholds can be used for combining surgery on the ascending aorta.clinical symptoms, and acceptable long-term survival can beobtained.53,56Surgery should also be considered in asymptomatic patientswith severe AR and impaired LV function at rest [restingEF 50% and/or LV end-diastolic diameter .70 mm and/orend-systolic diameter .50  (or .25 mm/m2 BSA)] sincethe likelihood of early development of symptoms is high,perioperative mortality low, and postoperative resultsexcellent. A rapid increase in ventricular parameters onserial testing is another reason to consider surgery. Goodquality echocardiograms and data conﬁrmation withrepeated measurements are strongly recommended beforesurgery in asymptomatic patients.The rationale for an aggressive approach in patients withmild AR and aortic dilatation is better deﬁned in patientswith Marfan’s syndrome than in patients with bicuspidvalves, and even more so in annulo-aortic ectasia. In borderline cases, the decision to replace the ascending aorta alsorelies on perioperative surgical ﬁndings as regards thethickness of the aortic wall and the status of the rest ofthe aorta.Aortic root dilatation  should be a surgical indication, irrespective of the degree of AR. In cases ofMarfan’s syndrome or bicuspid aortic valves, even lowerdegrees of root dilatation (45 and 50 , respectively)have been proposed as indications for surgery, especiallywhen there is a rapid increase of aortic diameter betweenserial measurements (5 mm per year) or family history ofaortic dissection.48,49Nitroprusside and inotropic agents (dopamine or dobutamine) may be used before surgery in patients with poorlytolerated acute AR to stabilize their clinical condition. Inpatients with chronic severe AR and heart failure,ACE-inhibitors are the treatment of choice when surgery iscontraindicated or in cases with persistent postoperativeLV dysfunction.In asymptomatic patients with high blood pressure, theindication for anti-hypertensive treatment with vasodilatorssuch as ACE-inhibitors or dihydropyridine calcium channelblockers is warranted.The role of vasodilators in the asymptomatic patientswithout high blood pressure in order to delay surgery isunproved.61,62In patients with Marfan’s syndrome, beta-blockers slowthe progression of the aortic dilatation63 and should alsobe given after operation. In patients with severe AR, theuse of beta-blockers should be very cautious because thelengthening of diastole increases the regurgitant volume.However, they can be used in patients with severe LV dysfunction. Recently, enalapril has also been used to delayaortic dilatation64 in patients with Marfan’s syndrome.Whether the same beneﬁcial effect occurs in patients withbicuspid aortic valves is not known.Patients with AR should be educated on endocarditis prevention and antibiotic prophylaxis.10In patients with Marfan’s syndrome or in young patientswith aortic root aneurysm, the family needs to be screenedto detect asymptomatic cases.Serial testingPatients with mild-to-moderate AR can be seen on a yearlybasis and echocardiography performed every 2 years.All patients with severe AR and normal LV function shouldbe seen for follow-up at 6 months after their initial examination. If LV diameter and/or EF show signiﬁcant changes, orthey become close to the thresholds for intervention,follow-up should continue at 6 month intervals. When parameters are stable, follow-up can be yearly.In patients with a dilated aortic root, and especially inpatients with Marfan’s syndrome or with bicuspid aorticvalves, examination of the aorta should be performed on ayearly basis, but with closer intervals if aortic enlargementis detected.Special patient populationsIn patients with moderate AR who undergo CABG or mitralvalve surgery, the decision to replace the aortic valveshould be individualized according to aetiology of AR, age,disease progression, and possibility of valve repair.Severe ARSymptomatic patients (dyspnoea, NYHAclass II, III,  or angina)Asymptomatic patients with restingLVEF 50%Patients undergoing CABG or surgery ofascending aorta, or on another valveAsymptomatic patients with restingLVEF .50% with severe LV dilatation:End-diastolic dimension .70  orESD .50  (or .25 mm/m2 BSA)aFor patients who have an indication for surgery on theaortic valve, lower thresholds can be used for combiningsurgery on the ascending aorta. Lower thresholds of aorticdiameters can also be considered for indicating surgery ifvalve repair can be performed by experienced surgeons.The choice of the surgical technique is adapted accordingto the following factors: associated root aneurysm, characteristics of leaﬂets, underlying pathology, life expectancy,and desired anticoagulation status.239Management of aortic regurgitation.Concurrent aortic valve replacement is more frequentlyconsidered when mitral surgery is prosthetic valve replacement than when it is mitral valve repair.If AR requiring surgery is associated with severe MR, thenboth should be operated on. Usually the aortic valve willrequire replacement and the operation required on themitral valve will depend on the chances of successfulrepair. Clearly, if the chances are low and the patient islikely to require anticoagulants because of the aorticsurgery, then mitral valve replacement is likely to be preferable. If the associated MR does not demand immediatesurgery, the decision is more difﬁcult and needs to be individualized, but if the regurgitation is organic and repair islikely, then concurrent mitral valve surgery is attractive.There will, however, be occasions when the patient’s clinicalcondition mandates the quickest and most simpleprocedure.Aortic stenosisIntroductionAS has become the most frequent type of VHD in Europeand North America. It primarily presents as calciﬁc AS inadults of advanced age (2–7% of the population .65years).2,3,65,66 The second most frequent aetiology, whichdominates in the younger age group, is congenital,whereas rheumatic AS has become rare.EvaluationPatient history and physical examination remain essential.Careful exploration for the presence of symptoms (exertional shortness of breath, angina, dizziness, or syncope) iscritical for proper patient management and must take intoaccount that patients may deny symptoms because they signiﬁcantly reduce their activities.The characteristic systolic murmur draws the attentionand guides the further diagnostic work in the right direction.Occasionally, the murmur may, however, be faint andprimary presentation may be heart failure of unknowncause. The disappearance of the second aortic sound isspeciﬁc to severe AS, although not a sensitive sign.15The general principles for the use of invasive and noninvasive investigations follow the recommendations madein the General comments section. issues that need to be addressed in AS are asfollows:Echocardiography has become the key diagnostic tool. Itconﬁrms the presence of AS, assesses the degree of valvecalciﬁcation, LV function and wall thickness, detects thepresence of other associated valve disease, and ﬁnally provides prognostic information.Doppler echocardiography is the preferred technique toassess severity.17 Transvalvular pressure gradients are ﬂowdependent and measurement of valve area represents,from a theoretical point of view, the ideal way toquantify AS.Nevertheless, it has to be emphasized that valvearea measurements also have their potential inaccuraciesand are less robust than gradient estimates in clinicalpractice. Thus, valve area alone with absolute cut-offpoints cannot be relied upon for clinical decisionmaking and it should be considered in combinationwith ﬂow rate, pressure gradient and ventricular function,as well as functional status. AS with a valve area ,1.0 cm2is considered severe; however, indexing to BSA, withFigure 1240Natural historyCalciﬁc AS is a chronic progressive disease. During a longlatent period, patients remain asymptomatic.70–72However, it should be emphasized that duration of theasymptomatic phase varies widely among individuals.Sudden cardiac death is a frequent cause of death in symptomatic patients but appears to be rare in the asymptomatic(1% per year).70–72 Reported average symptom-free survival at 2 years ranges from 20 to more than 50%.21,22,70–72The lower numbers must be viewed with caution sincesome patients in these studies underwent surgery withoutsymptoms. Finally, it has been speculated that myocardialﬁbrosis and severe LV hypertrophy, which may not be reversible after delayed surgery, could preclude an optimal postoperative long-term outcome. However, there are, so far,no data to conﬁrm this hypothesis.Predictors of the progression of AS and, therefore, of pooroutcome in asymptomatic patients have recently beenidentiﬁed. They are:...Clinical: older age, presence of atherosclerotic riskfactors.65,66Echocardiography: valve calciﬁcation, peak aortic jet velocity,  haemodynamic progression,71 andincrease in gradient with exercise.25 The combination ofa markedly calciﬁed valve with a rapid increase in velocityof 0.3 m/s within 1 year has been shown to identify ahigh-risk group of patients (80% death or requirementof surgery within 2 years71).Exercise testing: symptom development on exercisetesting in physically active patients, particularly thoseyounger than 70 years, predicts a very high likelihood ofsymptom development within 12 months. Recent datademonstrates a lower positive predictive value for abnormal blood pressure response, and even more so forST-segment depression, than symptoms for pooroutcome.22As soon as symptoms occur, the prognosis is dismal andmortality has been reported to be quite signiﬁcant evenwithin months of symptom onset,73 which is often notpromptly reported by patients.Results of interventionAortic valve replacement is the deﬁnitive therapy for severeAS. In contemporary series, operative mortality of isolatedaortic valve replacement is 3–5% in patients below70 years and 5–15% in older adults (Table 5).3,51,52 The following factors increase the risk of operative mortality:older age, associated comorbidities, female gender, higherfunctional class, emergency operation, LV dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension, coexisting coronary disease, and previous bypass or valve surgery. After successful valvereplacement, long-term survival rates are close to thoseexpected in the control population, symptoms are lessmarked, and quality of life is greatly improved.74 Riskfactors for late death include age, comorbidities, severefunctional condition, LV dysfunction, ventricular arrhythmias, and untreated coexisting coronary artery disease.In addition, poor postoperative outcome may result fromprosthesis-related complications and sub-optimal prostheticvalve haemodynamic performance.75Balloon valvuloplasty plays an important role in the paediatric population but a very limited role in adults becauseits efﬁcacy is low, complication rate is high (.10%), andrestenosis and clinical deterioration occur within 6–12months in most patients, resulting in a mid-term and longterm outcome similar to natural history.76 Preliminarya cut-off value of 0.6 cm2/m2 BSA is helpful, in particular inpatients with either unusually small or large BSA.Severe AS is unlikely if cardiac output is normal, and thereis a mean pressure gradient ,50 mmHg. In the presence oflow ﬂow, usually due to depressed LV function, low pressuregradients may be encountered in patients with severe AS. Assoon as mean gradient is ,40 mmHg, even a small valve areadoesnotdeﬁnitelyconﬁrmsevereASsincemild-to-moderately diseased valves may not open fully,resulting in a ‘functionally small valve area’ (pseudosevereAS).67Stress echocardiography using low-dose dobutamine maybe helpful in this setting to distinguish truly severe ASfrom the rare cases of pseudosevere AS.27 Truly severe ASshows only small changes in valve area (increase,0.2 cm2) with increasing ﬂow rate but signiﬁcant increasein gradients (maximum value of mean gradient .50 mmHg),whereas pseudosevere AS shows marked increase in valvearea but only minor changes in gradients.27,68 In addition,this test may detect the presence of contractile reserve(increase .20% of stroke volume during low-dose dobutamine test), which has prognostic implications.27,68Exercise stress echocardiography has been proposed forrisk stratiﬁcation in asymptomatic severe AS25 but moredata are necessary to determine its role.Echocardiographic evaluation will identify coexistentvalvular lesions including mitral annular calciﬁcation indegenerative disease and rheumatic mitral valve disease,as well as asymmetric dynamic subvalvular obstructionespecially in elderly women.TEE is rarely needed; however, it may provide images thatare good enough to allow valve planimetry and this is usefulwhen transthoracic visualization is poor and leaﬂets onlymoderately calciﬁed. TEE will also provide additional evaluation of other mitral valve abnormalities.Exercise testing is contraindicated in symptomaticpatients with AS but is useful for unmasking symptoms andin the risk stratiﬁcation of asymptomatic patients withsevere AS.21,22 In such cases, it is safe, provided it is performed under the supervision of an experienced physician,with symptoms, changes in blood pressure, and ECGclosely monitored. In current practice, stress tests areunder-used in patients with asymptomatic AS.3CT and MRI could improve assessment of the ascendingaorta, if required. Preliminary data suggest that multisliceCT may be useful in quantifying valve calciﬁcation, whichaids in assessing prognosis,28 as well as in measuring valvearea.69 However, more data are required to determine thefull role of multislice CT.Natriuretic peptides have been shown in preliminarystudies to predict symptom-free survival in AS.30 However,more data are required before recommending their serialmeasurement to identify optimal timing of surgery.Retrograde LV catheterization to assess the severity of ASis seldom needed and should only be used with caution, as itis not without risk.32241reports show that percutaneous aortic valve replacement isfeasible, but this procedure is at an early stage and furtherstudies are needed to evaluate its potential role.77Indications for surgeryTable 7stenosisIndications for aortic valve replacement in aortic....The rare asymptomatic patients with depressed LV function not due to another causeThose with echocardiographic predictors of poor outcomesuggested by the combination of a markedly calciﬁedvalve with a rapid increase in peak aortic velocity of0.3 m/s per year.If the exercise test is abnormal, particularly if it showssymptom development, which is a strong indication forsurgery in physically active patients.However, on the other hand, breathlessness on exercisemay be difﬁcult to interpret in patients with only lowphysical activity, particularly the elderly, making decisionmaking more difﬁcult. There is no strict age limit forperformance of exercise testing and it is reasonable topropose it in patients .70 years old who are still highlyactive.ClassPatients with severe AS and any symptomsPatients with severe AS undergoing coronary arterybypass surgery, surgery of the ascending aorta, oron another valveAsymptomatic patients with severe AS and systolicLV dysfunction (LVEF ,50%) unless due to othercauseAsymptomatic patients with severe AS andabnormal exercise test showing symptoms onexerciseAsymptomatic patients with severe AS andabnormal exercise test showing fall in bloodpressure below baselinePatients with moderate ASa undergoing coronaryartery bypass surgery, surgery of the ascendingaorta or another valveAsymptomatic patients with severe AS andmoderate-to-severe valve calciﬁcation, and arate of peak velocity progression 0.3 m/sper yearAS with low gradient (,40 mmHg) and LVdysfunction with contractile reserveAsymptomatic patients with severe AS andabnormal exercise test showing complexventricular arrhythmiasAsymptomatic patients with severe AS andexcessive LV hypertrophy (15 mm) unless this isdue to hypertensionAS with low gradient (,40 mmHg) and LVdysfunction without contractile reserveIBICIndications for balloon valvuloplastyIIaCThis intervention can be considered as a bridge to surgery inhaemodynamically unstable patients who are at highrisk for surgery (Recommendation class IIb, Level ofevidence C) or in patients with symptomatic severe ASwho require urgent major non-cardiac surgery (Recommendation class IIb, Level of evidence C). Occasionally, balloonvalvuloplasty could be considered as a palliative measurein individual cases when surgery is contraindicatedbecause of severe comorbidities.IIaCMedical therapyICICIIaCIIaCIIbCIIbCIIbCAS ¼ aortic stenosis, EF ¼ ejection fraction, LV ¼ left ventricular.aModerate AS is deﬁned as valve area 1.0–1.5 cm2 (0.6 cm2/m2 to0.9 cm2/m2 BSA) or mean aortic gradient 30–50 mmHg in the presenceof normal ﬂow conditions. However, clinical judgement is required.The progression of degenerative AS is an active processsharing a number of similarities with atherosclerosis.81Thus, modiﬁcation of atherosclerotic risk factors must bestrongly recommended following the guidelines of secondaryprevention in atherosclerosis.Although several retrospective reports have shown beneﬁcial effects of statins82,83 and ACE-inhibitors,84 data arestill conﬂicting and the only randomized trial assessing theeffect of statin therapy is negative.85 It is, therefore, tooearly for treatment recommendations.Symptomatic patients require early surgery, as no medicaltherapy for AS is able to delay the inevitability of surgery.However, patients who are unsuitable candidates forsurgery may be treated with digitalis, diuretics,ACE-inhibitors, or angiotensin receptor blockers if they areexperiencing heart failure. Beta-blockers should beavoided in these circumstances. In selected patients withpulmonary oedema, nitroprusside can be used under haemodynamic monitoring.Surgical indications are as follows (Table 7, Figure 2):Early valve replacement should be strongly recommendedin all symptomatic patients with severe AS who are otherwisecandidates for surgery. As long as mean gradient is still.40 mmHg, there is virtually no lower EF limit for surgery.On the other hand, the management of patients withlow-ﬂow, low-gradient AS (severely reduced EF and meangradient , 40 mmHg) is more controversial. The depressedEF in many patients in this group is predominantly causedby excessive afterload (afterload mismatch), and LV function usually improves after surgery.78,79 Conversely, secondary improvement in LV function is uncertain if the primarycause is scarring due to extensive myocardial infarction. Inpatients with low gradient and with evidence of contractilereserve, surgery is advised since it carries an acceptable riskand improves long-term outcome in most patients.Conversely, the outcome of patients without contractilereserve is compromised by a high operative mortalitydespite a trend towards better survival after surgery.27 can, nonetheless, be performed in these patientsbut decision-making should take into account clinical condition (in particular, the presence of comorbidity), degreeof valve calciﬁcation, extent of coronary disease, and feasibility of revascularization.Management of asymptomatic patients with severeAS remains a matter of controversy.5,13,80 The decisionto operate on asymptomatic patients requires carefulweighing of beneﬁts against risks. Early elective surgery,at the asymptomatic stage, can only be recommended inselected patients, at low operative risk. This could be thecase in:242Management of severe aortic stenosis.Co-existing hypertension should be treated; however,treatment should be carefully titrated to avoid hypotensionand patients more frequently evaluated.Maintenance of sinus rhythm is particularly important.Endocarditis prophylaxis is indicated in all patients withAS.10Serial testingThe wide variability of the rate of progression of AS heightens the need for patients to be carefully educated about theimportance of follow-up and reporting symptoms as soon asthey develop. In the asymptomatic patient, stress testsshould determine the recommended level of physicalactivity. Follow-up visits should include echocardiographicassessment since the rate of haemodynamic progression isimportant for management decisions. Type and interval offollow-up should be determined on the basis of the initialexamination.In cases of moderate-to-severe calciﬁcation of the valveand peak aortic jet velocity .4 m/s at initial evaluation,patients should be re-evaluated every 6 months for theoccurrence of symptoms and change in exercise toleranceor in echo-parameters. If peak aortic jet velocity hasincreased since the last visit (.0.3 m/s per year) or ifother evidence of haemodynamic progression is present,surgery should be considered. If no change has occurredand the patient remains asymptomatic, six-monthly clinicaland six- to 12-monthly clinical and echocardiographicre-evaluations are recommended.In patients who do not meet these criteria, a clinicalyearly follow-up is necessary, follow-up being closer inthose with borderline values. The frequency of echocardiographic examinations should be adapted to clinical ﬁndings.Special patient populationsIn patients with severe AS and severe coronary disease, theperformance of concomitant CABG provides a lower mortality rate than that observed in patients who do notundergo combined bypass surgery. However, combinedsurgery carries a higher risk than isolated valve replacementin patients without coronary disease. Thus, CABG should becombined whenever possible with valve surgery. On theother hand, aortic valve replacement is not necessaryduring CABG in patients with only mild AS.Finally, although there are no prospective randomizedtrials, data from retrospective analysis indicate thatpatients with moderate AS (mean gradient in the presenceof normal ﬂow 30–50 mmHg, valve area 1.0–1.5 cm2) willin general beneﬁt from valve replacement at the time ofcoronary surgery.86 However, individual judgement must berecommended considering BSA, individual haemodynamicdata, life expectancy, expected progression rate of AS,expected outcome from associated disease (particularlycomorbidity), and individual risk of valve replacement oreventual re-operation.Patients with severe symptomatic AS and diffuse coronaryartery disease, which cannot be revascularized, should notbe denied aortic valve replacement, even though this is ahigh-risk group.Recent studies have suggested the potential use of percutaneous coronary revascularization in place of bypassFigure 2Mitral regurgitationMR is now the second most frequent valve disease after AS.The treatment has been re-orientated as a result of the goodresults of valve repair. This section deals with organic,ischaemic, and functional MR.Organic mitral regurgitationOrganic MR covers all aetiologies in which leaﬂet abnormality is the primary cause of the disease, in opposition toischaemic and functional MR, in which MR is the consequence of LV disease.Reduced prevalence of rheumatic fever and increased lifespan in industrialized countries have progressively changedthe distribution of aetiologies. Degenerative MR is themost common aetiology in Europe, whereas ischaemic andfunctional MR are increasingly  isdealt with in separate speciﬁc .10EvaluationClinical examination usually provides the ﬁrst clues thatMR is present and may be signiﬁcant as suggested bythe intensity and duration of the systolic murmur andthe presence of the third sound.15 The general principlesfor the use of invasive and non-invasive investigationsfollow the recommendations made in the Generalcomments section.The speciﬁc issues in MR are as follows:Echocardiography is the principal examination and mustinclude an assessment of severity, mechanisms and repairability, and, ﬁnally, consequences.Several methods can be used to determine the severity ofMR. Colour-ﬂow mapping of the regurgitant jet is the easiestmethod but its accuracy is limited. The width of the venacontracta—the narrowest part of the jet—correlates withquantitative measurements of MR. The two quantitativemethods of evaluating regurgitant volume and calculatingERO are useful in experienced hands.90,91 The criteria fordeﬁning severe organic MR are described in Table 2.It should be emphasized again here that the assessmentof severity should not rely entirely on one single parameter, but requires an approach integrating blood ﬂowdata from Doppler with morphologic information andcareful cross-checking of the validity of such data againstthe consequences on LV and pulmonary pressures19(Table 2).In case of acute severe MR, physical examination and auscultation may be misleading, in particular, with a murmur oflow intensity, and colour Doppler ﬂow may underestimatethe severity of the lesion. The presence of hyperdynamicfunction in acute heart failure suggests the presence ofsevere MR.Transthoracic echocardiography provides precise anatomical deﬁnition of the different lesions, which must be relatedto the segmental and functional anatomy according to theCarpentier classiﬁcation in order to subsequently assessthe feasibility of repair.92TEE is frequently carried out before surgery for thispurpose,93 although transthoracic echocardiography, inexperienced hands and when using recent imaging techniques, can be sufﬁcient when images are of highquality.94 The results of mitral valve repair should beassessed intraoperatively by TEE to enable immediatefurther surgical correction if necessary.The consequences of MR are assessed by measuring leftatrial diameter, LV diameter and EF, and systolic pulmonaryarterial pressure.Evaluation of contractile reserve may be accomplished byexercise echocardiography, but the usefulness of thismethod for decision-making requires validation.26Preliminary series have also suggested the value of elevated BNP levels as predictors of long-term outcome butthis also remains to be validated.31Natural historyAcute MR is poorly tolerated and carries a poor prognosis inthe absence of intervention.Our knowledge of the natural history of chronic MRhas greatly improved due to recent observationalstudies.34,91,95,96In asymptomatic MR, the estimated 5 year rates (+standard error) of death from any cause, death fromcardiac causes, and cardiac events (death from cardiaccauses, heart failure, or new AF) with medical managementwere 22 + 3, 14 + 3, and 33 + 3%, respectively.91In addition to symptoms, age, atrial ﬁbrillation, degree ofMR (particularly ERO), left atrial dilatation, LV dilatation,and low LVEF are all predictors of poor outcome.In patients with chordal rupture, clinical condition maystabilize after an initial symptomatic period. However, itsurgery in patients with AS.87 However, available data arenot sufﬁcient to currently recommend this approach,except for selected high-risk patients with acute coronarysyndromes or in patients with non-severe AS.AS is increasingly observed in octogenarians and even innonagenarians who experience higher morbidity and operative mortality during aortic valve replacement. However,surgery can prolong and improve the quality of life.88Even though valve replacement is the procedure ofchoice in this population, a large percentage of suitablecandidates currently are, unfortunately, not referred forsurgery.3,33 Age, per se, should not be considered a contraindication for surgery. Decisions should be made on anindividual basis, taking into account patients’ wishes andcardiac and non-cardiac factors (see also General comments section). In this population, the need for an emergency operation, or, at the other end of the clinicalspectrum, very early intervention at an asymptomaticstage, should be avoided.When MR is associated with AS, colour jet size andother Doppler ﬁndings may be increased by the high ventricular pressures. As long as there are no morphologicalabnormalities (ﬂail or prolapse, post-rheumatic changesor signs of infective endocarditis), mitral annulus dilatation, or marked abnormalities of LV geometry, surgicalintervention on the mitral valve is in general not necessary, and functional MR often resolves after the aorticvalve is replaced.Bicuspid valves are common in AS, and there is a clearrelationship between the presence of bicuspid valvesand abnormalities of the aortic root even in the absenceof severe AS.  treatment of a dilated aortais, therefore, recommended at the same thresholds asin AR.89243244carries a poor spontaneous prognosis owing to subsequentdevelopment of pulmonary hypertension.ClassSymptomatic patients with LVEF .30% andESD ,55 mmAsymptomatic patients with LV dysfunction(ESD .45 mma and/or LVEF 60%)Asymptomatic patients with preserved LV functionand atrial ﬁbrillation or pulmonary hypertension(systolic pulmonary artery pressure .50 mmHgat rest)Patients with severe LV dysfunction (LVEF ,30%and/or ESD .55 mm)a refractory to medicaltherapy with high likelihood of durable repair,and low comorbidityAsymptomatic patients with preserved LV function,high likelihood of durable repair, and low risk forsurgeryPatients with severe LV dysfunction (LVEF ,30%and/or ESD .55 mm)a refractory to medicaltherapy with low likelihood of repair and lowcomorbidityICIIaCIIaCIIbBIIbCSeverity is based on clinical and echocardiographic assessment.ESD ¼ end-systolic dimension, EF ¼ ejection fraction, LV ¼ left ventricular, MR ¼ mitral regurgitation.aLower values can be considered for patients of small stature.Surgery is indicated in patients who have symptoms due tochronic MR, but no contraindications to surgery. Besidesvalve anatomy, the decision of whether to replace orrepair depends very much on the surgical expertise available. When LVEF is ,30%, a durable surgical repair canstill improve symptoms, although the effect on survival islargely unknown. In the latter situation, the decisionwhether to operate will take into account the response tomedical therapy, comorbidity, and the likelihood of valverepair.The management of asymptomatic patients is an area ofcontroversy since there are no randomized trials tosupport any particular course of action. On the one hand,the good results of valve repair and the potential risk ofpostoperative LV dysfunction are incentives for earlysurgery. On the other hand, even in low-risk cases, there isa small but deﬁnite risk of surgical mortality. The indicationsfor surgery depend on risk stratiﬁcation, the possibility ofvalve repair, and the preference of the informed patient.Surgery can be recommended in selected asymptomaticpatients with severe MR:...Indications for interventionIndications for surgery in severe chronic organic MR are asfollows (Table 8, Figure 3):Urgent surgery is indicated in symptomatic patients withacute MR.IBPatients with signs of LV dysfunction (LVEF  60% and/orend-systolic dimension .45 mm). Surgery in this groupshould be considered, even in patients with a high likelihood of valve replacement. Lower end-systolic dimensionvalues can be considered for patients of small stature.Patients with atrial ﬁbrillation and preserved LV function.Patients with preserved LV systolic function and pulmonaryhypertension.Further proof of the validity of a strategy using the criteria cited previously, in carefully followed-up patients,has been provided by recent data showing that the use ofResults of surgeryDespite the absence of randomized comparison between theresults of valve replacement and repair and the possibleinherent biases resulting from this, it is widely acceptedthat valve repair, when feasible, is the optimal surgicaltreatment in patients with severe MR. When comparedwith valve replacement, repair has a lower perioperativemortality (Table 5), improved survival, better preservationof postoperative LV function, and lower long-termmorbidity.97–101Besides symptoms, the most important predictors of postoperative outcome after surgery for MR are age, AF, preoperative LV function, and the reparability of the valve.The best results of surgery are observed in the patientswith a preoperative LVEF .60%. A preoperative end-systolicdiameter ,45 mm (no indexed value has been validated inMR) is also closely correlated with a good postoperativeprognosis.93,95–98 However, a value about which postoperative LV dysfunction will not occur has not been demonstrated, rendering prediction of the postoperativedysfunction difﬁcult in the individual patient. In additionto the initial measurements, the temporal changes of LVfunction should also be taken into account when makingdecisions about surgery. Progressive development of pulmonary hypertension is also a marker for poor prognosis.The probability of a durable valve repair is of crucialimportance.102,103 Degenerative MR due to segmental valveprolapse can usually be repaired with a low risk of reoperation. The reparability of extensive prolapse, rheumaticlesions, and, even more so, MR with leaﬂet calciﬁcation orextensive annulus calciﬁcation is not as consistent even inexperienced hands.The results of valve repair are also highly dependent onthe experience of the surgeon; this holds to be even moretrue as the lesions get more complex.In current practice, surgical expertise in mitral valverepair is growing and becoming widespread since it is usedin almost 50% of patients in registries in Europe3 and theUSA and in up to 90% in experienced centres.103When repair is not feasible, mitral valve replacement withchordal preservation is preferred.Recently, additional anti-arrhythmic procedures derivedfrom the Cox maze intervention have been proposed inpatients with preoperative AF to return them to and maintain sinus rhythm. The data available are still limited andthe deﬁnitive role of these procedures remains to bedetermined.104The ﬁrst percutaneous mitral valve repairs in man havebeen performed using either implants introduced via thecoronary sinus or stitches mimicking the Alﬁeri operation(edge-to-edge method) introduced transseptally.105,106Further evaluation is needed before deﬁning the potentialrole of these approaches.Table 8 Indications for surgery in severe chronic organic mitralregurgitation245Management of severe chronic organic mitral regurgitation.this strategy allows surgery at low risk and with good longterm outcome.107Intervention is debatable in asymptomatic patients withsevere MR with neither signs of LV dysfunction, nor AF, norpulmonary hypertension. It can be considered if there is ahigh likelihood of valve repair on the basis of valve lesionand experience of the surgeon, and a low operative risk.Conversely, attentive clinical follow-up is clearly recommended for patients at relatively high operative risk(e.g. elderly) or with doubt about the feasibility of valverepair. In this latter group of patients, operative risk and/or prosthetic valve complications probably outweigh theadvantages of correcting MR. These patients should bereviewed carefully and surgery indicated when symptomsor objective signs of LV dysfunction occur.Finally, solid data on the value of surgery are currentlylacking for patients with mitral valve prolapse and preservedLV function with recurrent ventricular arrhythmias despitemedical therapy.Medical therapyIn acute MR, reduction of ﬁlling pressures can be obtainedwith nitrates and diuretics. Nitroprusside reduces afterloadand regurgitant fraction. Inotropic agents should be addedin case of hypotension.Anticoagulant therapy, with a target international normalized ratio (INR) range between 2 and 3, should be given inpatients with MR and permanent or paroxysmal AF or whenever there is a history of systemic embolism or evidence ofleft atrial thrombus and during the ﬁrst 3 months followingmitral valve repair.108In severe MR, maintenance of sinus rhythm after cardioversion is unlikely unless the MR is treated surgically. If AFoccurs, heart rate should be controlled.There is no evidence to support the use of vasodilators,including ACE-inhibitors, in chronic MR without heartfailure and therefore they are not recommended in thisgroup of patients.109On the other hand, when heart failure has developed,ACE-inhibitors have a beneﬁt and may be used in patientswith advanced MR and severe symptoms who are not suitable for surgery or when there are still residual symptomsfollowing the operation, usually as a result of impaired LVfunction. Beta-blockers and spironolactone should also beconsidered as appropriate. Endocarditis prophylaxis is alsorequired.10Serial testingAsymptomatic patients with moderate MR and preserved LVfunction can be clinically followed-up on a yearly basis andechocardiography should be performed every 2 years.Asymptomatic patients with severe MR and preserved LVfunction should be seen every 6 months and echocardiography performed every year, the follow-up being closer if noprevious evaluation is available, and in patients with borderline values, or signiﬁcant changes since the last visit. Thesepatients should be instructed to promptly report any changein functional status.Following valve repair, as is the case after valve replacement, it is sensible to establish a baseline for ECG, X-ray,and echocardiography so that this is available for later comparison, particularly if clinical changes occur.Figure 3246Ischaemic mitral regurgitationIschaemic MR is a frequent entity, which is, however, frequently overlooked in the setting of acute or chronic coronary disease.110,111 Chronic ischaemic MR is the consequenceof a restriction in leaﬂet motion, which is due to tetheringby the subvalvular apparatus in patients who have LV enlargement and/or dysfunction, in particular of the posterolateral wall.Natural historyAcute MR, secondary to papillary muscle rupture, has adismal short-term prognosis and requires urgent treatment.Patients with chronic ischaemic MR have a poor prognosis.110 Although coronary artery disease and LV dysfunctionhave prognostic importance, the presence and severity ofMR are independently associated with increased mortality.Results of surgeryThe data are far more limited and heterogeneous in ischaemic MR than in organic MR. Overall, surgery of ischaemic MRremains a challenge. Operative mortality is higher than inorganic MR, and long-term prognosis is less satisfactorywith a higher recurrence rate of MR after valve repair.116These less favourable results are partly due to the moresevere comorbidities in ischaemic MR patients.116–119 Ifintervention is indicated, the preferred surgical procedureremains controversial. There is a trend favouring valverepair even if it carries a higher risk of mortality and ofrecurrence of MR than in the other aetiologies. Most patientswith ischaemic MR seem to beneﬁt from valve repair, usingundersized rigid ring annuloplasty,120,121 except in themost complex high-risk settings where survival after repairor replacement is similar.122 Finally, the presence of signiﬁcant myocardial viability is a predictor of good outcomeafter repair combined with bypass surgery.Most studies show that severe ischaemic MR is not usuallyimproved by revascularization alone.123,124 There arestudies that suggest that there is improved survival withvalve surgery in patients with moderate ischaemic MR;however, this is still debated since these studies are not controlled and are of limited size.125Indications for surgeryRupture of a papillary muscle necessitates urgent surgicaltreatment after stabilization of the haemodynamic status,using an intra-aortic balloon pump and vasodilators. Inaddition to CABG, surgery consists of valve replacement inmost cases.126The limited data in the ﬁeld of ischaemic MR result in lessevidence-based management (Table 9).Severe MR should be corrected at the time of bypasssurgery. However, there is a continuing debate on the management of moderate ischaemic MR. In such cases, valverepair is preferable and the decision must be made preoperatively, since intraoperative echocardiographic assessment underestimates the severity of ischaemic MR. Inpatients with low EF, surgery is more likely to be consideredif myocardial viability is present and if comorbidity is low.There are no data to support surgically correcting mild MRdue to ischaemia when the patient is asymptomatic from thepoint of view of MR and particularly when coronary revascularization can be carried out by percutaneous coronaryintervention. However, these patients should be carefullyfollowed up to detect any later change in the degree andthe consequences of ischaemic MR.Table 9 Indications for surgery in chronic ischaemic mitralregurgitationClassPatients with severe MR, LVEF .30% undergoingCABGPatients with moderate MR undergoing CABG ifrepair is feasibleSymptomatic patients with severe MR, LVEF ,30%and option for revascularizationPatients with severe MR, LVEF .30%, no optionfor revascularization, refractory to medicaltherapy, and low comorbidityICIIaCIIaCIIbCCABG ¼ coronary artery bypass grafting, MR ¼ mitral regurgitation,LV ¼ left ventricular, EF ¼ ejection fraction.EvaluationAcute MR due to papillary muscle rupture should be envisaged in a patient presenting with shock during acute myocardial infarction. The murmur may even be inaudible,which stresses the importance of performing echocardiography urgently in this setting. In chronic ischaemic MR, themurmur is of low intensity, which should not lead to the conclusion that MR is trivial.It should be remembered that ischaemic MR is a dynamiccondition and its severity may vary from time to time inrelation to arrhythmias, ischaemia, hypertension, or exercise. Acute pulmonary oedema may result from a largeexercise-induced increase in ischaemic MR.112Echocardiographic examination is useful for establishingthe diagnosis and differentiating true ischaemic MR, wherevalves are normal, from organic MR in patients with coronarydisease.After myocardial infarction, ischaemic MR should be routinely looked for and  assessment of MR should bedone. Colour ﬂow mapping of the regurgitant jet overestimates the severity of ischaemic MR. The use of quantitativemethods adds important information. In ischaemic MR,lower thresholds of severity, using quantitative methods,have been proposed (20 mm2 for ERO and 30 mL for regurgitant volume).24,110Ischaemic MR is a dynamic disease, which makes it logicalto think that stress testing is likely to play an important rolein the evaluation. Preliminary studies have shown that quantitation of MR during exercise is feasible, provides a goodappreciation of dynamic characteristics, and has prognosticimportance.24,112–114 The prognostic value of exercise teststo predict the results of surgery has, however, to be evaluated.TEE in the operating room should not be used to decideupon treatment of MR because in some patients, the afterload reduction during surgery decreases the degree of MR.Limited studies using low-dose dobutamine or positronemission tomography have explored preoperative myocardial viability as a predictor of outcome.115The assessment of coronary status is of particular importance since it completes the diagnosis and allows evaluationof the revascularization options.Functional mitral regurgitationtherapy may reduce MR severity and improve LV function.134Deﬁbrillators should be used according to the appropriaterecommendations.Mitral stenosisIntroductionAlthough the prevalence of rheumatic fever has greatlydecreased in industrialized countries, MS still results in signiﬁcant morbidity and mortality worldwide.2,3 Since itsdevelopment 20 years ago, percutaneous mitral commissurotomy (PMC) has impacted signiﬁcantly upon the management of MS.135EvaluationIt may be difﬁcult to evaluate precisely the functional disability in these patients who often present with a gradualdecrease in activity and may feel asymptomatic for years.Physical examination, chest X-ray, and ECG establish thediagnosis in most cases and allow for initial evaluation ofconsequences such as atrial ﬁbrillation and pulmonaryhypertension.15The general principles for the use of invasive and noninvasive investigations follow the recommendations madein the General comments section. issues in MS are as follows:Echocardiography is the main method to assess the severity and consequences of MS, as well as the extent of anatomic lesions. Severity of MS should be quantiﬁed usingtwo-dimensional planimetry and the pressure half-timemethod, which are complementary approaches for measuring valve area. Planimetry, when it is feasible, is themethod of choice, in particular, immediately after PMC.Measurements of mean transvalvular gradient calculatedusing Doppler velocities are highly rate- and ﬂowdependent; however, they are useful to check consistencyof the assessment of severity, in particular, in patients insinus rhythm.136 MS usually does not have clinical consequences at rest when valve area is .1.5 cm2, except inpatients with particulary large body size.The assessment of valve morphology is important for theselection of candidates for PMC. Scoring systems havebeen developed to assess suitability, taking into accountvalve thickening, mobility, calciﬁcation, subvalvulardeformity, and commissural  (Tables 10,11).Echocardiography also evaluates pulmonary artery pressures, the presence of associated MR, concomitant valvedisease, and the size of the left atrium.The transthoracic approach usually provides sufﬁcientinformation for routine management. However, transoesophageal examination should also be performed to excludeleft atrial thrombosis before PMC or after an embolicepisode or if transthoracic echocardiography provides suboptimal information on anatomy or associated MR.In patients with no or doubtful symptoms, stress testingaids decision-making by unmasking symptoms. Exerciseechocardiography provides other information by assessingthe evolution of mitral gradient and pulmonary pressures.139Its additional value for decision-making has to be furtherdeﬁned.In this group, mitral valves are also structurally normal andMR is secondary to the changes in LV geometry resulting fromimpaired LV function. It includes MR observed in cardiomyopathy and in ischaemic disease with severe LV dysfunction.Evaluation is the same as in ischaemic MR.The data on the natural history and results of surgery areeven more limited than in ischaemic MR. A precise analysis isdifﬁcult because of the limited number of series includingsmall numbers of patients and mixing patients with orwithout revascularization.Several observational studies have shown the high prevalence of signiﬁcant MR in chronic heart failure, as well as itsindependent association with a poor prognosis.127 However,its true prevalence and its pathogenic contribution to prognosis remain uncertain.The main surgical technique is restrictive annuloplasty.120,121,128,129 Other techniques can be combinedaiming at LV remodelling and are currently being evaluated.Surgical treatment of MR in these patients was previouslyavoided owing to concerns about the high operative riskand the potential deleterious effect of increasing afterload. Opinions have changed as a result of case seriesfrom highly experienced centres reporting goodresults.120,121,128,129 Depending on the degree of urgency,operative mortality has been reported between 5 and18%. In patients with EF ,30%, a 2 year survival rate of70% and a 5 year survival rate of 61% have been reportedwith good functional results.120,121 These data suggestthat valve surgery using stringent restrictive annuloplastycombined with surgery of the LV may improve symptomsat an acceptable risk. However, it is not clear if surgeryimproves prognosis since more recent studies have shownthat valve surgery does not improve survival.130,131 Thismay be due to the fact that it may not inﬂuence LV remodelling, in particular, in patients with severe LV dilatation. Inaddition, little information is available on the durability ofvalve repair in this setting.The limited data available suggest that isolated mitralvalve surgery in combination with LV reconstruction techniques may be considered in selected patients with severefunctional MR and severely depressed LV function, includingthose with coronary disease, where bypass surgery is notindicated, who remain symptomatic despite optimalmedical therapy, and if comorbidity is low, the aim beingto avoid or postpone transplantation.132,133 Ongoing trialsare expected to better deﬁne appropriate strategies. Inthe other patients, medical therapy followed by transplantation when this fails is probably the best option. However,surgery on the regurgitant mitral valve should not be considered in ‘in extremis patients’ with low output, severeright ventricular failure, and high comorbidity.Medical therapy is the preferred treatment which shouldbe used before considering surgical correction of the functionally regurgitant valve. ACE-inhibitors and beta-blockers,which may reduce MR by progressive inverse LV remodelling,are indicated. Nitrates and diuretics are useful for treatingacute dyspnoea, secondary to any dynamic component.LV dilatation, distortion, and dyssynchrony are linked tofunctional MR in patients with heart failure and LV dysfunction. Thus, in patients with increased QRS duration andintra-ventricular asynchrony, cardiac resynchronization247248Table 10 Anatomic scores predicting outcome after percutaneous mitral commissurotomy: Wilkins’ mitral valve morphology score137MobilitySubvalvular thickeningThickeningCalciﬁcation1Highly mobile valve withonly leaﬂet tips restrictedLeaﬂet mid and baseportions have normalmobilityMinimal thickening justbelow the mitral leaﬂetsThickening of chordalstructures extending toone-third of the chordallengthThickening extended todistal third of the chordsLeaﬂets near normal inthickness (4–5 mm)Mid-leaﬂets normal,considerable thickeningof margins (5–8 mm)A single area of increasedecho brightnessScattered areas of brightnessconﬁned to leaﬂet marginsThickening extendingthrough the entireleaﬂet (5–8 mm)Considerable thickening ofall leaﬂet tissue(.8–10 )Brightness extending into themid-portions of the leaﬂets234Valve continues to moveforward in diastole,mainly from the baseNo or minimal forwardmovement of the leaﬂetsin diastoleExtensive thickening andshortening of all chordalstructures extendingdown to the papillarymusclesTable 11 Anatomic scores predicting outcome after percutaneous mitral commissurotomy: Cormier’s grading of mitral valveanatomy142EchocardiographicgroupMitral valve anatomyGroup 1Pliable non-calciﬁed anterior mitralleaﬂet and mild subvalvular disease(i.e. thin chordae 10 mm long)Pliable non-calciﬁed anterior mitralleaﬂet and severe subvalvular disease(i.e. thickened chordae ,10 mm long)Calciﬁcation of mitral valve of anyextent, as assessed by ﬂuoroscopy,whatever the state of subvalvularapparatusGroup 2Group 3Echocardiography also plays an important role in monitoring the results of PMC during the procedure and in evaluating the ﬁnal results at least 24 h after its completion.Natural historyStudies on natural history are old and non-controlled. Inasymptomatic patients, survival was good up to 10 years,progression being highly variable with sudden deterioration,precipitated by complications, such as atrial ﬁbrillation orembolism, in half of the patients.140,141 Symptomaticpatients have a poor prognosis.Results of interventionPercutaneous balloon commissurotomyPMC usually provides at least a 100% increase in valve area.Good initial results are usually deﬁned by a valve area.1.5 cm2 without more than mild MR. Technical successand complications are related to the condition of thepatient and the team’s experience.142–145 Failure ratesrange from 1 to 15%. Major complications rates are asfollows: procedural mortality, 0.5–4%; haemopericardium,0.5–10%; embolism, 0.5–5%; severe regurgitation, 2–10%.Emergency surgery is seldom needed (,1%).Extensive brightnessthroughout much of theleaﬂet tissueClinical follow-up data conﬁrm the late efﬁcacy of PMCsince event-free survival ranges from 35 to 70% after10–15 years, depending on patient characteristics.135,144,145When the immediate results are unsatisfactory, surgery isusually required in the following months. Conversely, aftersuccessful PMC, long-term results are good in the majorityof cases. When functional deterioration occurs, it is lateand mainly related to re-stenosis. Successful PMC has alsobeen shown to reduce embolic risk. The prediction of longterm results is related to preoperative anatomic and clinicalcharacteristics and to the quality of the immediateresults.135,145 Identiﬁcation of the variables linked tooutcome has enabled predictive models to be developedwith a high sensitivity; however, their speciﬁcity is low, indicating insufﬁcient prediction of poor immediate results.SurgeryConservative surgeryIn industrialized countries, closed mitral valve commissurotomy has been replaced by open-heart mitral commissurotomy using cardiopulmonary bypass, which not onlycorrects commissural fusion but also acts on subvalvulardeformity. In selected series from experienced centres,mostly including young patients, long-term results aregood: at 15 years, survival was 96%, and freedom fromvalve-related complications 92%.146 The recent Euro HeartSurvey shows that in current practice, open-heart commissurotomy is seldom performed.3Valve replacementOperative mortality ranges between 3 and 10% and correlates with age, functional class, pulmonary hypertension,and presence of coronary artery disease. Long-termsurvival is related to age, functional class, atrial ﬁbrillation,pulmonary hypertension, preoperative LV function, andcomplications of the prosthetic valve, especially thromboembolism and haemorrhage or structural deterioration.147Indications for interventionType of treatment, as well as its timing, should be decided onthe basis of clinical characteristics (including functional statusand predictors of operative risk and of the results of PMC),Grade249Table 12 Indications for percutaneous mitral commissurotomyin mitral stenosis with valve area , 1.5 cm2ClassIBICIIaCIIaCIIaCIIaCIIaCIIaCIIaCPMC ¼ percutaneous mitral commissurotomy.aFavourable characteristics for PMC can be deﬁned by the absence ofseveral of the following:- Clinical characteristics: old age, history of commissurotomy, NYHAclass IV, atrial ﬁbrillation, severe pulmonary hypertension,- Anatomic characteristics: echo score .8, Cormier score 3 (Calciﬁcation of mitral valve of any extent, as assessed by ﬂuoroscopy), very smallmitral valve area, severe tricuspid regurgitation.Figure 4 Management of severe mitral stenosis. Patients at high risk of embolism or haemodynamic decompensation are deﬁned by previous history ofembolism, dense spontaneous contrast in the left atrium, recent or paroxysmal atrial ﬁbrillation, systolic pulmonary pressure .50 mmHg at rest, need formajor non-cardiac surgery, desire of pregnancy.Symptomatic patients with favourablecharacteristicsa for PMCSymptomatic patients with contraindication or highrisk for surgeryAs initial treatment in symptomatic patients withunfavourable anatomy but otherwise favourableclinical characteristicsaAsymptomatic patients with favourablecharacteristicsa and high thrombo-embolic risk orhigh risk of haemodynamic decompensation:Previous history of embolismDense spontaneous contrast in the left atriumRecent or paroxysmal atrial ﬁbrillationSystolic pulmonary pressure . 50 mmHg at restNeed for major non-cardiac surgeryDesire of pregnancyvalve anatomy, and local expertise and availability in theﬁelds of PMC and surgery.Indications for intervention are as follows (Table 12,Figure 4):Intervention should only be performed in patients withclinically signiﬁcant MS (valve area ,1.5 cm2 or,1.7–1.8 cm2 in particular in cases of unusually largepatients).5,13Intervention should be performed in symptomaticpatients. In the PMC era, most symptomatic patients withfavourable valve anatomy undergo PMC. However, opencommissurotomy may be performed by experienced operators in young patients with no or mild calciﬁcation andmild-to-moderate MR. PMC is the procedure of choicewhen surgery is contraindicated or high risk, or for patientswith favourable characteristics. Indications are a matter ofdebate for patients with unfavourable anatomy.Decision-making in this heterogeneous group of patientsmust take into account the multifactorial nature of resultprediction of PMC and the relative experience in PMC andsurgery of the treating centre.135,144,145 In current practicein Europe, surgery for MS is mostly valve replacement.3PMC can be offered as initial treatment for selected patientswith mild-to-moderate calciﬁcation or impairment of thesubvalvular apparatus, who have otherwise favourable clinical characteristics, in particular, in young patients in whom250Medical therapyDiuretics or long-acting nitrates transiently ameliorate dyspnoea. Beta-blockers or heart-rate regulating calciumchannel blockers are useful to slow the heart rate and cangreatly improve exercise tolerance by prolonging diastoleand hence the time available for LV ﬁlling via the stenosedvalve. Anticoagulant therapy with a target INR in theupper half of the range 2–3 is indicated in patients witheither permanent or paroxysmal AF.108 In patients withsinus rhythm, anticoagulation is mandatory when there hasbeen prior embolism or a thrombus is present in the leftatrium (Recommendation class I, Level of evidence C), andrecommended when TEE shows dense spontaneous echocontrast or in patients who have an enlarged left atrium(diameter .50 ) (Recommendation class IIa, Level ofevidence C).12,13Cardioversion is not indicated before intervention inpatients with severe MS, as it does not usually restoreTable 13 ContraindicationscommissurotomytopercutaneousmitralMitral valve area .1.5 cm2Left atrial thrombusMore than mild MRSevere- or bicommissural calciﬁcationAbsence of commissural fusionSevere concomitant aortic valve disease or severe combined TSand TRConcomitant coronary artery disease requiring bypass surgeryMR ¼ mitral regurgitation, TR ¼ tricuspid regurgitation, TS ¼ tricuspidstenosis.sinus rhythm in the medium or long term. If atrial ﬁbrillationis of recent onset and the left atrium only moderatelyenlarged, cardioversion should be performed soon after successful intervention. Sinus rhythm can be maintained withthe use of class  or III anti-arrhythmic drugs.Infective endocarditis prophylaxis is indicated.10 Incountries with a high prevalence of rheumatic disease, rheumatic fever prophylaxis should be given to young patientsand be continued after conservative intervention untiladult age.Serial testingAsymptomatic patients with clinically signiﬁcant MS whohave not undergone intervention should be followed upyearly by means of clinical and echocardiographic examinations and at longer intervals in cases with stenosis of alesser degree.Management of patients after successful PMC is similar tothat of asymptomatic patients. When PMC is not successfuland symptoms persist, surgery should be considered earlyunless there are deﬁnite contraindications.Special patient populationsWhen re-stenosis with symptoms occurs after surgical commissurotomy, reoperation in most cases requires valve replacement. PMC can be considered in such patients if they havefavourable characteristics and no contraindications and ifthe predominant mechanism of re-stenosis is commissuralre-fusion.149Similarly, repeat PMC can be proposed in selected patientswith the same characteristics as mentioned earlier if restenosis occurs several years after an initially successful PMC.In patients who present with valve anatomy that is notideal for PMC but who are not surgical candidates, repeatPMC may have a palliative role.For information on MS during pregnancy, see Managementof pregnancy section.In the elderly, when surgery is high risk or contraindicated, PMC is a useful option, even if only palliative. Inpatients with favourable anatomic characteristics, PMCcan be attempted ﬁrst, resorting to surgery if results areunsatisfactory. In other patients, surgery is preferable ifnot contraindicated.150,151In patients with MS combined with severe aortic valvedisease, surgery is usually preferable. In cases of coexistingMS and moderate aortic valve disease, PMC can be performed as a means of postponing the surgical treatment ofboth valves. PMC can be attempted in patients with severeMS and severe functional tricuspid regurgitation (TR). Inthe others, with severe organic disease of the tricuspidvalve, surgery on both valves may be preferred.Tricuspid diseaseTricuspid stenosisTricuspid stenosis (TS), which is almost exclusively ofrheumatic origin, is rarely observed in developed countries,although it is still seen in developing countries.2,4Detection requires careful evaluation, as it is almostalways associated with left-sided valve lesions thatdominate the presentation.postponing valve replacement is particularly attractive. Inthe other patients, surgery is preferable.Because of the small but deﬁnite risk inherent in PMC,truly asymptomatic patients are not usually candidates forthe procedure, except in the cases where there is increasedrisk of thrombo-embolism or of haemodynamic decompensation such as severe pulmonary hypertension or a desire forpregnancy. In such patients, PMC should only be performedif they have favourable characteristics and by experiencedoperators.In asymptomatic patients with MS, because of theinherent risks, surgery is seldom considered and is limitedto the rare patients at high risk of complications and withcontraindications for PMC.Surgery is the only alternative when PMC is contraindicated (Table 13). The most important contraindication isleft atrial thrombosis. A contraindication is self-evident ifthe thrombus is localized in the cavity. When the thrombusis localized in the left atrial appendage, the indicationsfor PMC are limited to patients with contraindications tosurgery or those without urgent need for interventionwhen oral anticoagulation can be given for a minimum of2 months and a maximum of 6 months and provided a newTEE examination shows the disappearance of the thrombus.148 If the thrombus persists, surgery is preferred.Intraoperative correction of AF can be combined withvalve surgery in selected cases; the beneﬁt of this approach,however, requires further validation.251EvaluationClinical signs are often masked by those of the associatedvalvular lesions, especially MS.15 Echocardiography providesthe most useful information. TS is often overlooked andrequires careful evaluation. The pressure half-timemethod has never been validated for the tricuspid valveand the continuity equation is rarely applicable because ofthe frequency with which associated regurgitation ispresent. Planimetry of the valve area is usually impossibleunless three-dimensional echocardiography is used. Nogenerally accepted grading of TS severity exists. A meangradient .5 mmHg is considered indicative of clinicallysigniﬁcant TS.17 Echocardiography should also examine thepresence of commissural fusion, the anatomy of the valveand its subvalvular apparatus, which are the most importantdeterminants of reparability, and the degree of concomitantregurgitation.Table 14 Indications for intervention in tricuspid valve diseaseClassSurgeryThe lack of pliable leaﬂet tissue is the main limitation forconservative techniques.For valve replacement, even though this is still a matterof debate, biological prostheses are usually preferred tomechanical ones because of the higher risk of thrombosiscarried by the latter and the satisfactory long-term durability of the former in the tricuspid position.152–154Percutaneous interventionPercutaneous balloon tricuspid dilatation has been performed in a limited number of cases, either alone or alongside PMC, but frequently induces signiﬁcant regurgitation.Data on evaluation of long-term results are lacking.155,156Indications for interventionIntervention on the tricuspid valve is usually carried out atthe time of intervention on the other valves in patientswho are symptomatic despite medical therapy.Conservative surgery or valve replacement, according toanatomy and surgical expertise in valve repair, is preferredto balloon commissurotomy, which can only be consideredas a ﬁrst approach in the rare cases of isolated TS76(Table 14).Medical therapyIn the presence of heart failure, diuretics are useful but oflimited efﬁcacy. Endocarditis prophylaxis should be givenas appropriate.10ICICICIIaCIIaCIIaCIIbCTR ¼ tricuspid regurgitation, TS ¼ tricuspid stenosis.aPercutaneous technique can be attempted as a ﬁrst approach if TS isisolated.EvaluationPredominant symptoms are those of associated diseases andeven severe TR may be well tolerated for a long period oftime. Although they are load dependent, clinical signs ofright heart failure are of value in evaluating the severityof TR.15Echocardiography is the ideal technique to evaluate TR. Itprovides the following information:..Tricuspid regurgitationTrivial TR is frequently detected by echocardiography innormal subjects. Pathological TR is more often functionalrather than due to a primary valve lesion. Functional TR isdue to annular dilatation and secondary to right ventricularpressure and/or volume overload. Pressure overload is mostoften caused by pulmonary hypertension resulting from leftsided heart disease or, more rarely, cor pulmonale, idiopathic pulmonary artery hypertension, and right ventricularvolume overload possibly relating to atrial septal defects orintrinsic disease of the right ventricle.157,158IC...Structural abnormalities of the valve distinguishingbetween its functional and primary forms. In the latterform, the aetiology can usually be identiﬁed from speciﬁcabnormalities such as vegetations in endocarditis,159leaﬂet retraction in rheumatic and carcinoid, and ﬂailleaﬂet in myxomatous or post-traumatic disease. Thedegree of dilatation of the annulus should also bemeasured.Semi-quantitative evaluation of TR severity should bebased on the proximal convergence zone, proximal jetwidth, dilatation of the inferior vena cava, and reductionor reversal of systolic blood ﬂow in the hepatic veins19,160(Table 2). It is important that this assessment should integrate the quantitative data and the parameters evaluatingthe consequences of TR, taking into account the sensitivity of the different indices to loading conditions.19The criteria for deﬁning severe TR are described inTable 2.Evaluation of the right ventricle, despite existing limitations of any assessment of right ventricular function.Measurement of peak right ventricular systolic pressure asan estimate of pulmonary pressure by measuring peak tricuspid regurgitant velocity.Assessment of the degree of the combined lesions, lookingcarefully at the LV and the associated valve lesions, particularly on the left side, and LV function.Severe TR in a patient undergoing left-sided valvesurgerySevere primary TR and symptoms despite medicaltherapy without severe right ventricular dysfunctionSevere TS (+TR), with symptoms despite medicaltherapyaSevere TS (+TR) in a patient undergoingleft-sided valve interventionaModerate organic TR in a patientundergoing left-sided valve surgeryModerate secondary TR with dilatedannulus (.40 mm) in a patient undergoingleft-sided valve surgerySevere TR and symptoms, after left-sided valvesurgery, in the absence of left-sided myocardial,valve, or right ventricular dysfunction andwithout severe pulmonary hypertension(systolic pulmonary artery pressure . 60 mmHg)Severe isolated TR with mild or no symptoms andprogessive dilation or deterioration of rightventricular function252When available, MRI may provide additional useful information on the size and function of the right ventricle,which is difﬁcult to evaluate using other imaging techniques.Results of surgeryAnnuloplasty is key to conservative surgery. Better longterm results are observed with prosthetic rings than withthe stitch technique, the incidence of residual TR being,respectively, 10 and 20–35% at 5 years.158,161,163 Valvereplacement carries a risk of operative mortality rangingfrom 7 to 40%. Ten year survival ranges from 30 to 50%, thepredictors being preoperative functional class, LV functionand right ventricular function, and prosthetic complications.152–154 The current experience favours the use oflarge bioprostheses over mechanical valves.Reoperation on the tricuspid valve in cases of persistentTR after mitral valve surgery carries a high risk mostly dueto the clinical condition of the patients (including age andthe number of previous cardiac interventions) and maywell have poor long-term results related to the presenceof irreversible right ventricular dysfunction prior toreoperation.Indications for surgeryThe timing of surgical intervention and the appropriatetechnique remain controversial mostly due to the limiteddata available and their heterogeneous nature (Table 14).As general principles, we can say, if technically possible,conservative surgery is preferable to valve replacement,and surgery should be carried out early enough to avoid irreversible right ventricular dysfunction.The possible need for correction of TR is usually considered at the time of surgical correction of left-sided valvular lesions. In these circumstances, the relative simplicityof tricuspid valve repair and the high risk of secondary surgical correction are incentives to earlier indications for tricuspid repair. In these circumstances, severe TR should becorrected. In the other cases with lesser degree of TR, surgical correction can be recommended when there is pulmonary hypertension or severe dilatation of the annulus161,162(diameter .40 mm or .21 /m2 BSA) and, even moreso, if TR is of organic origin. Finally, mild TR does notwarrant intervention.Surgery limited to the tricuspid valve can be required inpatients with severe primary TR resulting from endocarditisor trauma who remain symptomatic or in those with no ormild symptoms who have objective signs of signiﬁcantimpairment of right ventricular function.In the particular circumstances of persistent or recurrentsevere TR despite medical therapy after mitral valvesurgery, isolated operation on the tricuspid valve should beconsidered in the absence of left-sided valve, myocardial,or severe right ventricular dysfunction.Medical therapyDiuretics improve signs of congestion.  therapy ofthe underlying disease is warranted.Combined and multiple valve diseasesThe data on mixed and multiple valve diseases are lackingand do not allow for evidence-based recommendations. Inaddition, the large number of combinations possible leadsto the necessity of individualized decisions in this domain.Signiﬁcant stenosis and regurgitation can be found on thesame valve. Such combined VHDs are encountered in rheumatic valve disease and, less frequently, in degenerativevalve disease. When stenosis or regurgitation is largely predominant, the management follows the recommendationsconcerning the predominant VHD. When the severity ofboth stenosis and regurgitation is balanced, indications forinterventions should be based on how well the patient tolerates the combined VHD rather than indices of severity ofstenosis or regurgitation. Intervention can be consideredwhen a non-severe stenosis is combined with a non-severeregurgitation in patients who have symptoms or in whom itis clear the combined lesion is leading to LV impairment.Intervention is nearly always prosthetic valve replacementin this setting.Disease of multiple valves may be encountered in severalconditions but particularly rheumatic heart disease. Besidesthe separate assessment of each separate valve lesion, it isnecessary to take into account the interaction between thedifferent valve lesions. As an illustration, associated MS maylead to underestimation of the severity of AS, sincedecreased stroke volume due to MS lowers the ﬂow acrossthe aortic valve and hence the aortic gradient. This underlines the need to combine different measurements, including assessment of valve areas, if possible using methodsthat are less dependent on loading conditions, such asplanimetry. Associated MR and AR can be encountered, inparticular, in Marfan’s syndrome. In these patients, besidesseverity, the assessment of valve anatomy is of importanceto evaluate the possibility of conservative surgery on eachvalve.Indications for intervention are based on global assessment of the consequences of the different valve lesions,i.e. symptoms or consequences on LV dimensions and function. In addition, the decision to intervene on multiplevalves should take into account the extra surgical risk ofcombined procedures. The choice of surgical techniqueshould take into account the presence of the other VHD.For example, the desire to repair one valve may bedecreased if prosthetic valve replacement is needed onanother valve. The management of other speciﬁc associations of VHD is detailed in the individual sections.Natural historyThe limited data that are available on the natural history ofprimary TR suggest that severe TR has a poor prognosis evenif it may be well tolerated functionally for years.Functional TR may diminish or disappear as right ventricular failure improves following the treatment of its cause.However, TR may persist even after successful correctionof left-sided lesions. Predicting the evolution of functionalTR after surgical treatment of mitral valve disease remainsdifﬁcult.157  hypertension, increased right ventricular pressure and dimension, reduced right ventricularfunction, and the diameter of the tricuspid annulus areimportant risk factors for persistence or late worsening ofTR.161,162 However, TR may persist even after successful correction of left-sided lesions.Prosthetic valvesPatients who have undergone previous valve surgery represent an important proportion of patients with VHD,accounting for 28% of all patients with VHD in the EuroHeart Survey.3 The extent of prosthesis-related complications in patient outcome after surgery emphasizes theimportance of optimizing the choice of the valve substituteas well as the subsequent management of patients withprosthetic valves.There is no perfect valve substitute. All involve some compromise and all introduce new disease processes, whetherthey are mechanical or biological. The latter include xenografts, homografts, and autografts. Autografts and homografts in the aortic position provide the best effectiveoriﬁce area (EOA). Stentless bioprostheses provide betterEOA than stented bioprostheses, which are relatively stenotic in the small sizes (annulus size 21 mm). Modern mechanical valves provide better haemodynamic performancethan stented bioprostheses.All mechanical valves require long-term anticoagulation.Biological valves are less thrombogenic and do not requirelong-term anticoagulation unless there are other indications, e.g. persistent atrial ﬁbrillation. However, all aresubject to structural valve deterioration (SVD) over time.Two randomized trials, which began in the 1970s, comparing now obsolete models of mechanical and bioprostheticvalves found no signiﬁcant difference in rates of valvethrombosis and thrombo-embolism, in accordance withnumerous individual valve series in the literature. Longterm survival was also very similar.147,164 A recentmeta-analysis of mechanical and bioprosthetic valve seriesfound no difference in survival when age and risk factorswere taken into account.165Apart from haemodynamic considerations, choice betweena mechanical valve and a bioprosthesis in adults is thus determined primarily by assessing the risk of anticoagulant-relatedbleeding with a mechanical valve vs. the risk of SVD with abioprosthesis.166,167 The former is determined mainly by thetarget INR chosen, the quality of anticoagulation control,the concomitant use of aspirin, and the patient’s own riskfactors for bleeding.168 The risk of SVD must take intoaccount the gradual deterioration in performance statuswith increasing SVD, the risk of re-operation and length ofthe recovery period after subsequent surgery.Homografts and pulmonary autografts are mainly used inthe aortic position, though even here they togetheraccount for less than 0.5% of aortic valve replacements inmost large databases. Like bioprostheses, homografts aresubject to SVD.169 Besides technical concerns, limited availability and increased complexity of reoperation contributeto restrict the use of homografts to complicated aorticvalve endocarditis.Although the pulmonary autograft in the aortic position( operation) provides excellent haemodynamics, itrequires speciﬁc expertise and has several disadvantages:the risk of SVD in the homograft in the pulmonary position,the risk of moderate AR due to dilatation of the aortic root,and the risk of rheumatic involvement. Apart from shortterm advantages in selected young adults, such asprofessional athletes, the main advantage of the autograftis in growing children, as the valve and new aortic annulusappear to grow with the child.170 However, the homograftpulmonary valve replacement does not and, therefore,usually needs replacement as the child gets bigger.In practice, the choice is between mechanical prosthesisand bioprosthesis in most patients. Rather than setting arbitrary age limits, prosthesis choice should be individualized167 and discussed in detail with the patient, takinginto account the following factors (Tables 15,16):(1) Life expectancy should be estimated according tocountry and patient’s age, and take into accountcomorbidities.(2) A mechanical valve should be recommended if a mechanical valve is implanted on another valve and shouldTable 15 Choice of the prosthesis: in favour of mechanicalprosthesisaClassDesire of the informed patientand absence of contraindication forlong-term anticoagulationPatients at risk of accelerated SVDbPatient already on anticoagulation becauseof other mechanical prosthesisPatients already on anticoagulation becauseat high risk for thrombo-embolismcAge ,65–70 and long life expectancydPatients for whom future redo valve surgerywould be at high risk (due to LV dysfunction,previous CABG, multiple valve prosthesis)ICICICIIaCIIaCIIaCCABG ¼ coronary artery bypass grafting, LV ¼ left ventricular, SVD ¼structural valve deterioration.aThe decision is based on the integration of several of the factors givenin the table.bYoung age, hyperparathyroidism.cRisk factors for thrombo-embolism: severe LV dysfunction, atrial ﬁbrillation, previous thrombo-embolism, hypercoagulable state.dAccording to age, gender, the presence of comorbidity, and countryspeciﬁc life expectancy.Table 16 Choice of the prosthesis: in favour of bioprosthesisaClassDesire of the informed patientUnavailability of good-quality anticoagulation(contraindication or high risk, unwillingness,compliance problems, lifestyle, occupation)Re-operation for mechanical valve thrombosis in apatient with proven poor anticoagulant controlPatient for whom future redo valve surgery wouldbe at low riskLimited life expectancyb, severe comorbidity, orage .65–70Young woman contemplating pregnancyICICICIIaCIIaCIIbCaThe decision is based on the integration of several of the factors givenin the table.bAccording to age, gender, the presence of comorbidity, and countryspeciﬁc life expectancy.Choice of prosthetic valve253254(3)(4)(6)be also considered if the patient is already on anticoagulants for another reason.Iftherearedeﬁnitecontraindicationstoanticoagulation or the patients’ lifestyle exposes themto frequent injury, a biological substitute should berecommended.171,172SVD occurs more rapidly in young patients and in case ofhyperparathyroidism,includingrenalfailure.173Bioprostheses should be avoided if possible before theage of 40. SVD progresses more slowly in elderly patientsbut this conclusion is based upon reports of lower ratesof re-operation, often without taking into account thosepatients with SVD who are too frail to undergore-operation. Bioprostheses should be recommended inpatients whose life expectancy is lower than the presumed durability of the bioprosthesis, particularly ifcomorbidities will necessitate other surgical proceduresin the future, and in those with increased bleeding risk.Although SVD is accelerated in chronic renal failure,poor long-term survival with either type of prosthesisand an increased risk of complications with mechanicalvalves may favour the choice of a bioprosthesis in thissituation.174In women of childbearing age who wish to become pregnant, choice between mechanical and bioprostheticvalves depends on a balance of risks, both for themother and the foetus. Using warfarin in a dose of5 mg/day or less throughout pregnancy until the 36thweek minimizes the risk of both foetal malformationand maternal valve thrombosis.175 On the other hand,although SVD occurs rapidly in this age group, the riskof reoperation is relatively low (if surgery is not requiredin an emergency during pregnancy) and comparesfavourably with the risk of a pregnancy under anticoagulant therapy.Quality of life issues must also be taken into account.Inconvenience of oral anticoagulation can be minimizedby home monitoring and self-management of anticoagulation.176 Although bioprosthetic recipients can avoidlong-term anticoagulation, they face the possibility ofdeterioration in functional status owing to SVD and theprospect of reoperation if they live long enough.Management after valve replacementThrombo-embolism and anticoagulant-related bleedingtogether account for 75% of complications experiencedby prosthetic valve recipients and most space is thereforedevoted to this topic. Endocarditis prophylaxis and management of prosthetic valve endocarditis are detailed in separate  devoted to endocarditis.10 A morecomprehensive review of management after valve surgeryis available in a previous Special ESC article.14Baseline assessment and modalities of follow-upA complete baseline assessment should be ideally performed6–12 weeks after surgery. If for practical reasons this outpatient evaluation cannot be organized, it could be done atthe end of the postoperative stay. This will include clinicalassessment, chest X-ray, ECG, transthoracic echocardiography, and blood testing. This reference assessment is ofutmost importance to interpret subsequent changes inmurmur, prosthetic sounds, as well as ventricular functionand transprosthetic gradients as assessed by  echocardiography. This postoperative visit is also useful toimprove patient education on endocarditis prophylaxisand, if needed, on anticoagulant therapy, as well as emphasizing that new symptoms should be reported as soon as theyoccur.All patients who have undergone valve surgery requirelifelong follow-up by a cardiologist in order to detect earlydeterioration in prosthetic function or ventricular function,or progression of disease in a further heart valve. Clinicalassessment should be performed yearly or as soon as possible if new cardiac symptoms occur. Transthoracic echocardiography should be performed if any new symptoms occurafter valve replacement or if complications are suspected.Yearly echocardiographic examination is recommendedafter the ﬁfth year in patients with bioprosthesis.Transprosthetic gradients during follow-up are best interpreted in comparison with the baseline values in the samepatient, rather than in comparison with theoretical valuesfor a given prosthesis, which lack reliability. TEE should beconsidered if transthoracic echocardiography is of poorquality and in all cases of suspected prosthetic dysfunctionor endocarditis. Cineﬂuoroscopy can provide usefuladditional information if valve thrombus or pannus issuspected.14Antithrombotic managementGeneral managementAntithrombotic management should encompass the effective management of risk factors for thrombo-embolism inaddition to the prescription of antithrombotic drugs.177,178Oral anticoagulation is recommended for the followingsituations:...Lifelong for all patients with mechanical valves.5,14,178Lifelong for patients with bioprostheses who have otherindications for anticoagulation, e.g. atrial ﬁbrillation, orwith a lesser degree of evidence, e.g. heart failure,impaired LV function (EF ,30%).For the ﬁrst 3 months after insertion in all patients withbioprostheses with a target INR of 2.5. However, there iswidespread use of aspirin (low dose: 75–100 mg) as analternative to anticoagulation for the ﬁrst 3 months, butthere are no randomized studies to support the safety ofthis strategy.179Although there is no consensus regarding the initiationof anticoagulant therapy immediately after valvereplacement, oral anticoagulation should be started duringthe ﬁrst postoperative days. Intravenous heparin enableseffective anticoagulation to be obtained before the INRrises.The ﬁrst postoperative month is a particularly high-riskperiod for thrombo-embolism, and anticoagulation shouldavoid being lower than the target value during thisperiod.180 In addition, anticoagulation should be monitoredmore frequently during this period.Target INRThe choice of optimum INR should take into account patientrisk factors and the thrombogenicity of the prosthesis asdetermined by reported valve thrombosis rates for thatprosthesis in relation to speciﬁc INR levels (Table 17).guidance about individual prosthesis thrombogenicity, asthey are heavily inﬂuenced by so many other patient-relatedfactors and the methods of data collection. Unfortunately,currently available randomized trials comparing differentINRs offer little general guidance owing to limitationsimposed by their selection criteria, small numbers ofpatients with short follow-up, and varied methodologies,making them unsuitable for meta-analysis.181,182In selecting the optimum INR, certain caveats apply:Prostheses cannot be conveniently categorized by basicdesign (e.g. bileaﬂet, tilting disc, etc.) or date of introduction for the purpose of determining thrombogenicity.For many currently available prostheses, particularlynewly introduced prostheses, sufﬁcient data on valvethrombosis rates at different levels of INR do not existto allow categorization. Until further data become available, they should be placed in the ‘medium thrombogenicity’ category.INR recommendations in individual patients may need tobe revised downwards if recurrent bleeding occurs froma source not amenable to treatment, or revised upwardsin case of embolism.We chose to recommend a median INR value rather than arange to avoid considering extreme values in the targetrange as a valid target INR, since values at either end of arange are not equally acceptable and effective.The risk of major bleeding rises considerably when the INRexceeds 4.5, and exponentially above an INR of 6.0. An INRof 6.0 therefore requires reversal of anticoagulation.However, in patients with prosthetic valves who are notbleeding, intravenous vitamin K should not be usedbecause of the risk of valve thrombosis if the INR fallsrapidly. The patient should be admitted to hospital, theoral anticoagulant stopped, and the INR allowed to fall gradually. Spontaneous fall in the INR after anticoagulant cessationoccurs more slowly in the elderly and in the presence of heartfailure.183 It is permissible to use oral vitamin K, given inincrements of 1 mg, in patients who are treated using longhalf-life vitamin K blockers such as phenprocoumon. If theINR is .10.0, consideration should be given to the use offresh frozen plasma. Reversal of anticoagulation should bemore aggressive, using fresh frozen plasma and adapteddoses of intravenous vitamin K,184 if there is active bleeding drugsIn determining whether an antiplatelet agent should beadded to anticoagulation in patients with prostheticvalves, it is important to distinguish between the possiblebeneﬁts in vascular disease and those speciﬁc to prostheticvalves. Trials showing a beneﬁt from antiplatelet drugs invascular disease185 and in patients with prosthetic valvesand vascular disease186 should not be taken as evidencethat patients with prosthetic valves and no vasculardisease will also beneﬁt. When added to anticoagulation,antiplatelet agents increase the risk of major bleeding.185–191 They should therefore not be prescribed for allpatients with prosthetic valves, but reserved for speciﬁcindications, according to the analysis of the beneﬁt andthe increased risk of major bleeding.Indications for the addition of an antiplatelet agent toanticoagulation include concomitant arterial disease, in particular, coronary disease and other signiﬁcant atherosclerotic disease. Antiplatelet agents can also be added afterrecurrent or one deﬁnite embolic episode with adequateINR. Addition of antiplatelet agents should be associatedwith a full investigation and treatment of identiﬁed riskfactors and optimization of anticoagulation management(Recommendation class IIa, Level of evidence C).Addition of aspirin and clopidogrel is necessary followingintracoronary stenting but increases bleeding risk.192,193The use of drug-eluting stents should be restricted inpatients with mechanical prostheses to shorten as much aspossible the use of triple antithrombotic therapy. Duringthis period, weekly monitoring of INR is advised and anyover-anticoagulation should be avoided.Finally, there is no evidence to support the long-term useof antiplatelet agents in patients with bioprosthesis who donot have an indication other than the presence of the bioprosthesis itself.Interruption of anticoagulant therapyAlthough most instances of short-term anticoagulationinterruption do not lead to thrombo-embolism or valvethrombosis, the corollary is that most cases of valve thrombosis occur following a period of anticoagulation interruption for bleeding or another operative procedure.194Anticoagulation management during subsequent non-cardiacsurgery therefore requires very careful management on thebasis of risk assessment.177,195,196 Besides prosthesis- andpatient-related prothrombotic factors (Table 17), surgeryfor malignant disease or an infective process carries a particular risk, due to the hypercoagulability associated withthese conditions. For very high-risk patients, anticoagulation interruption should be avoided if at all possible. Manyminor surgical procedures (including dental extraction)and those where bleeding is easily controlled do notrequire anticoagulation interruption. The INR should benot amenable to local control. Bleeding with a therapeuticINR is often related to an underlying pathological cause andit is important to identify and treat it.High variability of the INR is the strongest independentpredictor of reduced survival after valve replacement.168Self-management of anticoagulation has been shown toreduce INR variability and should therefore be recommended in all patients who, after education and training,have the ability to control their own anticoagulation.176Figure 5catheterization. Percutaneous arterial puncture is safewith an INR , 2.0. If a higher target INR is needed, radialapproach may be recommended if the appropriate expertiseis available. In the rare patients who require transseptalcatheterization, direct LV puncture, or pericardiocentesis,the INR should be ,1.2 and bridging anticoagulation isneeded as described previously.14Management of valve thrombosisObstructive valve thrombosis should be suspected promptlyin any patient with any type of prosthetic valve who presents with a recent increase in shortness of breath orembolic event. Suspicion should be higher if there hasbeen recent inadequate anticoagulation or a cause forincreased coagulability (e.g. dehydration, infection, etc.).The diagnosis should be conﬁrmed by transthoracic echocardiography and/or TEE or cineﬂuoroscopy.202,203The management of prosthetic thrombosis is high riskwhatever the option taken. Surgery is high risk because itis most often performed in emergency conditions and isreintervention. On the other hand, ﬁbrinolysis carriesrisks of bleeding, systemic embolism, and recurrentthrombosis.The analysis of risk and beneﬁts of ﬁbrinolysis should beadapted to patient characteristics and local resources.Indications for surgery or antithrombotic therapy are asfollows (Figure 5):Urgent or emergency valve replacement is the treatmentof choice for obstructive thrombosis in critically ill patientswithout serious comorbidity (Recommendation class I, Levelof evidence C). If the thrombogenicity of the prosthesis is anManagement of left-sided obstructive prosthetic thrombosis.lowered to a target of 2.0.197,198 (Recommendation class I,Level of evidence B).For major surgical procedures, in which anticoagulantinterruption is considered essential (INR ,1.5), patientsshould be admitted to hospital in advance and transferredto intravenous unfractionated heparin (Recommendationclass IIa, Level of evidence C).  is stopped 6 hbefore surgery and resumed 6–12 h after. Low molecularweight heparin (LMWH) can be given subcutaneously asan alternative preoperative preparation for surgery(Recommendation class IIb, Level of evidence C).However, despite their wide use and the positive resultsof observational studies,199–201 the safety of LMWHs inthis situation has not been widely established and theirefﬁcacy has not been proved by controlled studies, particularly in patients at high risk of valve thrombosis. WhenLMWHs are used, they should be administered twice aday, using therapeutic rather than prophylactic doses,adapted to body weight and if possible according to monitoring of  activity. LMWHs are contraindicated incase of renal failure.Despite the low level of evidence for both strategies, thecommittee favours the use of unfractionated intravenousheparin.Effective anticoagulation should be resumed as soon aspossible after the surgical procedure and maintained untilthe INR is once again in the therapeutic range.If required, after a careful risk–beneﬁt assessment, combined aspirin therapy should be discontinued 1 week beforea non-cardiac procedure.Oral anticoagulation can be continued at modiﬁeddoses in the majority of patients who undergo cardiacimportant factor, it should be replaced with a less thrombogenic prosthesis.Fibrinolysis should be considered in:Fibrinolysis is less likely to be successful in mitralprostheses, in chronic thrombosis, or in the presence ofpannus, which can be difﬁcult to distinguish fromthrombus.204–206Management of left-sided non-obstructive prostheticthrombosis is as follows (Figure 6):Critically ill patients unlikely to survive surgery because ofcomorbidities or severely impaired cardiac function priorto developing valve thrombosis.Situations in which surgery is not immediately availableand the patient cannot be transferred.Thrombosis of tricuspid or pulmonary valve replacements,because of the higher success rate and low incidence ofembolism.Non-obstructive prosthetic thrombosis is diagnosed usingTEE performed after an embolic event, or systematically following mitral valve replacement with a mechanical prosthesis. The management depends mainly on the occurrence of athrombo-embolic event and the size of the thrombus. Closemonitoring by echocardiography and/or cineﬂuoroscopy ismandatory. The prognosis is favourable with medicaltherapy in most cases of small thrombus (,10 mm). Agood response with gradual resolution of the thrombusobviates the need for either surgery or ﬁbrinolysis.Conversely, surgery is recommended for large (10 mm)non-obstructive prosthetic thrombus complicated byembolism (Recommendation class IIa, Level of evidence C)or which persists despite optimal anticoagulation.207,208Fibrinolysis may be considered as an alternative if surgeryis at high risk. However, the use of ﬁbrinolysis for nonobstructive prosthetic thrombosis raises serious concernsregarding the risk of bleeding and thrombo-embolism andshould therefore be very limited.reoperation (Recommendation class IIa, Level of evidenceC). Prophylactic replacement of a bioprosthesis implanted.10 years ago, without structural deterioration, could beconsidered during an intervention on another valve or coronary artery.The decision to reoperate should take into account therisk of reoperation, which increases with older age, highfunctional class, LV dysfunction, comorbidities, and, aboveall, the emergency situation. This underlines the need forcareful follow-up to allow for reoperation at an earlystage, in particular, in patients who are at low risk forreoperation.212,213Percutaneous balloon interventions should be avoided inthe treatment of stenotic left-sided bioprostheses andhave a limited short-term efﬁcacy in right-sided prostheticvalves.Treatment or reversal of remediable risk factors such asAF, hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, diabetes,smoking, chronic infection, and prothrombotic blood testabnormalities.Optimization of anticoagulation control, if possible withpatient self-management, on the basis that bettercontrol is more effective than simply increasing thetarget INR. This should be discussed with the neurologistin case of recent stroke.Aspirin should be added, if it was not prescribed before,after a careful analysis of the risk–beneﬁt ratio. should be prescribed in a low-dose formulation (100 mgdaily) and any over-anticoagulation should be avoided.Heart failureHeart failure after valve surgery should lead to a search forprosthetic-related complications, deterioration of repair, LVdysfunction (in particular after correction of regurgitation),or progression of another valve disease. Non-valvularrelated causes such as coronary disease, hypertension, orsustained arrhythmias should also be considered.The management of patients with persistent LV systolicdysfunction should follow the guidelines on the managementof chronic heart failure.16Management of haemolysis and paravalvular leakBlood tests for haemolysis should be part of routinefollow-up.  measurement is too sensitive andlactate dehydrogenase, although non-speciﬁc, is betterrelated to the severity of haemolysis. The diagnosis of haemolytic anaemia requires TEE to detect a paravalvular leak(PVL). Only limited data are available regarding therapeuticoptions. There is a consensus to recommend reoperation ifPVL is related to endocarditis or if PVL causes haemolysisneeding repeated blood transfusions or leading to severesymptoms (Recommendation class I, Level of evidence C).In patients with haemolytic anaemia and PVL, wheresurgery is contraindicated, or those unwilling to undergore-operation, medical therapy includes iron supplementation, beta-blockers, and erythropoietin if haemolysis issevere.210,211 Percutaneous closure of PVL has only beenthe subject of isolated case reports and could not be considered so far as a validated alternative to surgery.Management of bioprosthetic failureSVD occurs in all bioprostheses and homografts if theyremain in situ long enough. After the ﬁrst 5 years fromimplantation, yearly echocardiography is required todetect early signs of SVD: leaﬂet stiffening, calciﬁcation,reduced EOA and/or regurgitation. Auscultatory and echocardiographic ﬁndings should be carefully compared withprevious examinations in the same patient. Reoperation isadvised in symptomatic patients with signiﬁcant prostheticdysfunction (signiﬁcant increase in trans-prosthetic gradientor severe regurgitation) (Recommendation class I, Level ofevidence C) and in asymptomatic patients with any signiﬁcant prosthetic dysfunction, if they are at low risk forManagement during non-cardiac surgeryThere is a signiﬁcant risk of cardiovascular morbidity andmortality in patients with VHD undergoing non-cardiacsurgery, especially in patients with severe AS, which is themost common type of valve disease seen in Europe3 and itis particularly common in the elderly.The problem of valvular patients undergoing non-cardiacsurgery is only partially addressed in the literature. Theexisting guidelines for perioperative cardiovascular evaluation for non-cardiac surgery214 are mainly devoted to theﬁeld of ischaemic heart disease.The present recommendations arise from extrapolationfrom studies concerning cardiovascular risk in otherinstances, personal experience, and clinical judgement.Clinical predictors of increased perioperativecardiovascular riskThe major predictors of cardiovascular risk during noncardiac surgery are unstable coronary syndromes, decompensated heart failure, signiﬁcant arrhythmias (includinghigh-grade atrio-ventricular block, ventricular arrhythmias,or supraventricular arrhythmias with uncontrolled ventricular rate), and severe valvular disease.214Among patients with valvular disease, risk assessmentshould incorporate symptomatic status, presence or not ofarrhythmias, severity of the valvular lesion, LV function,and level of pulmonary pressure and comorbidities, including ischaemic heart disease.Cardiovascular risk can also be stratiﬁed according to thedifferent non-cardiac surgical procedures.214Management of thrombo-embolismThrombo-embolism after valve surgery is multifactoral bothin its aetiology and its origin.209 Although manythrombo-embolic events will have originated from thrombusor a vegetation on a prosthesis or as the result of the abnormal ﬂow conditions created by a prosthesis, many otherswill have arisen from other sources as the result of otherpathogenic mechanisms and be part of the background incidence of stroke and transient ischaemic attack in thegeneral population.Thorough investigation of each episode of thromboembolism is therefore essential (including cardiac and noncardiac imaging when appropriate) to allow for appropriatemanagement (Figure 6), rather than simply increasing thetarget INR or adding an antiplatelet agent.Prevention of further thrombo-embolic events involves:Preoperative clinical evaluation valve lesionsAortic stenosisSeveral studies215–219 have clearly shown that severe AS(aortic valve area ,1 cm2 or 0.6 cm2/m2 BSA) increasesthe risk of non-cardiac surgery, and among patients withvalve disease undergoing non-cardiac surgery, those withsigniﬁcant AS have the highest risk.Recommendations for management are as follows:In patients with signiﬁcant AS who need urgent noncardiac surgery, surgical procedures should be performedunder careful haemodynamic monitoring.When elective non-cardiac surgery is needed in apatient with AS, the risk of cardiac complications duringsurgery should be balanced with the risk and beneﬁtsof having the valve replaced before non-cardiac surgery.The severity of the valvular lesion and the presence ofclinical symptoms as well as the risk and the urgency ofnon-cardiac surgery itself should be considered. It is alsoimportant to re-evaluate whether non-cardiac surgery isessential. A decision algorithm is proposed for patientswith signiﬁcant AS facing elective non-cardiac surgery(Figure 7).In asymptomatic patients with severe AS, a non-cardiacprocedure of low or moderate risk can be performedsafely. If high-risk non-cardiac surgery is needed, thepatient should be carefully evaluated for aortic valve replacement before non-cardiac surgery including coronaryangiography to rule out coexistent coronary artery disease.Factors inﬂuencing the preference for valve replacementperformed before non-cardiac surgery would be thedegree of severity of AS, the likelihood of early symptomdevelopment (high degree of valve calciﬁcation or abnormalexercise test), as well as the overall status of the patient(low comorbidity and long-life expectancy). In thesepatients, a bioprosthesis is the preferred valve substitute,Figure 7 Management of severe aortic stenosis and elective non-cardiac surgery. *Assessment of the risk of cardiac complications for non-cardiac surgery (fromEagle et al.214). High risk (.5%): emergent major operations, particularly in the elderly, aortic and other major vascular surgery, peripheral vascular surgery,anticipated prolonged surgical procedures associated with large ﬂuid shifts and/or blood loss. Intermediate risk (1 to 5%): carotid endarterectomy, head andneck surgery, intraperitoneal and intrathoracic surgery, orthopedic surgery, prostate surgery. Low risk (,1%): endoscopic procedures; superﬁcial procedure;cataract surgery; breast surgery.Before non-cardiac surgery, severe VHD should be identiﬁedand the clinical status of the patient carefully evaluated.The presence of symptoms, that is, dyspnoea, angina,syncope, or heart failure, as well as the presence of arrhythmias, like atrial ﬁbrillation, should be recorded. Physicalexamination and the ECG should focus on identiﬁcation ofVHD. In patients with a murmur, an echocardiographicstudy should be done to rule out the diagnosis of signiﬁcantvalve disease. This is particularly important in agedpatients, because a mild systolic murmur can be the onlyphysical sign of signiﬁcant AS.The severity of the valve lesion, ventricular function, andpulmonary pressure should be carefully evaluated by echocardiography before surgery.Each case should be individualized and agreementreached after a full discussion with cardiologists, anaesthesiologists, ideally with a particular skill in cardiology, andsurgeons.Mitral stenosisIn non-signiﬁcant MS (valve area .1.5 cm2), non-cardiacsurgical procedures can be performed at low risk.In asymptomatic patients with signiﬁcant MS and a systolicpulmonary artery pressure ,50 mmHg, non-cardiac surgerycan also be performed at low risk, although it should beremembered that the onset of atrial ﬁbrillation mayproduce a sharp deterioration.In symptomatic patients or in patients with systolic pulmonary artery pressure .50 mmHg, correction of MS, bymeans of PMC whenever possible, should be attemptedbefore non-cardiac surgery.This recommendation is stronger before high-risk noncardiac procedures. If surgery, in particular, valve replacement, is needed, the decision to proceed before non-cardiacsurgery should be taken with caution and based on strictindividual considerations.Aortic regurgitation and mitral regurgitationIn non-signiﬁcant AR or MR, non-cardiac procedures can beperformed at low risk.In asymptomatic patients with preserved LV function andsevere MR or AR, non-cardiac surgery can be performed atlow risk.In symptomatic patients or in patients with depressed LVfunction (EF ,30%), non-cardiac surgery should be performed only if strictly needed. The medical therapy ofheart failure should be optimized before surgery and vasodilators are particularly useful in this context.220Prosthetic valvesIn patients with prosthetic valves, valvular disease hasalready been corrected and non-cardiac surgery can besafely performed from the haemodynamic point of view,providing that there are no symptoms or signs of prostheticdysfunction and recent echocardiographic assessment hasbeen satisfactory. However, there is a high risk, mostlyrelated to the changes in anticoagulation regimen, inpatients with mechanical valves. Thus, the managementof anticoagulation is of utmost importance in thesecircumstances (see Interruption of anticoagulant therapysection).Endocarditis prophylaxisIn valve disease patients, all surgical procedures, evenminor, require scrupulous asepsis and avoidance of woundhaematoma formation.Antibiotic prophylaxis should be prescribed for thosepatients undergoing non-cardiac procedures at high bacteremic risk.10Perioperative monitoringValvular patients submitted to moderate or high-risk nonsurgical procedures need particular perioperative care,especially ensuring that systemic hypotension or volumedepletion or overload is avoided. Particular attentionshould be paid to avoid hypotension in patients with AS.In patients with moderate-to-severe AS or MS, betablockers or amiodarone can be used prophylactically inorder to maintain sinus rhythm in the postoperativeperiod.221 Whether the beneﬁcial role of beta-blockers oncardiovascular mortality before major vascular surgery222applies to valvular patients is not known.It is prudent to electively admit such patients to intensivecare postoperatively even if they appear to be doing well.Management during pregnancyHaemodynamic changes that normally occur during pregnancy may worsen tolerance of underlying heart disease.Native VHD is the most frequently acquired heart diseaseencountered during pregnancy even in developed countries.Certain native VHDs carry a poor prognosis for the motherand foetus. In patients with a valve prosthesis, the modalities of anticoagulant therapy are problematic.Cardiac risk of pregnancyThe main cardiovascular changes are increase in bloodvolume, decrease in systemic vascular resistance, andincrease in heart rate. Cardiac output increases from 30 to50% after the ﬁfth month, increases further during labourand delivery, and normalizes within 3 days of delivery.223Pregnancy also induces changes in haemostasis, all ofwhich contribute to increased coagulability and thromboembolic risk.224The risk of maternal cardiac complications is high in casesof severe stenotic valvular disease, in particular, MS withpulmonary hypertension, severe regurgitation complicatedby LV dysfunction, and ’s syndrome with aneurysmof the ascending aorta.223–227 The risk is increased inwomen with a history of cardiac events, arrhythmias, orwho are in NYHA class III or , such patients mustundergo intervention to correct their valve lesions and, ifpresent, their aortic problems before considering pregnancy. However, pregnancy is often already present whenthe patient presents.Evaluation of the pregnant patient with heartvalve diseaseIdeally, valve disease should be evaluated before pregnancyand treated if necessary. Although dyspnoea may be difﬁcultto interpret in pregnant women, its occurrence after theﬁrst trimester should lead to suspicion of underlying heartdisease. In women with mechanical valve prostheses, it isin order to avoid anticoagulation problems during the subsequent non-cardiac surgery.In asymptomatic patients who are poor candidates forvalve replacement because of severe comorbidities asassessed by a high  or poor life expectancy, noncardiac surgery should be carefully discussed and, if reallyneeded, performed under strict haemodynamic monitoring.In symptomatic patients with severe AS facing non-cardiacsurgery, valve replacement should always be consideredeven before non-cardiac surgery at low-to-moderate risk.If valve replacement is contraindicated, non-cardiacsurgery should be performed only if absolutely necessary.Although its practice has not been rigorously evaluated, percutaneous aortic valvuloplasty to create a time window ofreduced cardiac risk during which the non-cardiac surgerycan be performed has been considered76 and could have arole depending on local expertise.Patients with prosthetic valvesMaternal mortality is estimated between 1 and 4% and ismostly related to thombo-embolism.229,230The risks are particularly high in patients with mitral valveprostheses. Therefore, these patients should be informed ofthe risks and they require careful risk assessment and veryclose monitoring of anticoagulant therapy if pregnancyoccurs. antagonists increase the risk of miscarriage,prematurity, and embryopathy, the latter in  of cases,in particular, when used between the sixth and 12thweeks. The risk is lower when  dose is 5 mg/day.224  antagonists are contraindicated duringlabour and delivery because of the risk of cerebral bleedingin the foetus. Unfractionated heparin therapy is safe for thefoetus, but it is associated with a considerable increase inthe thrombo-embolic risk for the mother, including occlusiveprosthetic thrombosis. Experience with LMWHs remainslimited and controversial, with uncertainties in doseremaining.229TreatmentAll strategies (Table 18) should be discussed and approvedbetween obstetricians, cardiologists, and the patient andher family. risks related to pregnancyNative valve diseaseMS, which is the most frequent VHD encountered duringpregnancy, is often poorly tolerated when valve area is,1.5 cm2, even in previously asymptomatic patients.226Dyspnoea worsens between the third and ﬁfth months,which corresponds to the increase in cardiac output. Thepersistence of dyspnoea or pulmonary hypertension isassociated with a high risk of complications at delivery,thereby threatening the life of both the mother andfoetus.223Severe AS is less frequently encountered during pregnancy. Complications occur mainly in patients who weresymptomatic before pregnancy.225 The risk of heart failureduring pregnancy or at delivery is low when mean aortic gradient is ,50 mmHg.224Foetal prognosis is also impaired in the case of stenoticheart valve disease, due to growth retardation, pretermdelivery, and low birth weight.226,227For these reasons, patients with severe MS or AS should betreated before pregnancy if possible, even in asymptomaticpatients.Chronic AR and MR are well tolerated during pregnancy,even when severe, provided LV systolic function is preserved.224 However, the risk of complications is high whenLVEF is ,40%, the prognosis being close to that of cardiomyopathy. Conversely, acute regurgitation is poorly tolerated.In patients with Marfan’s syndrome, the risk ofaortic-related complications including dissection duringpregnancy increases markedly when AR is more than mildor when maximum aortic diameter is .40 mm.228 In thesecases, pregnancy should be preceded by replacement ofthe ascending aorta, in particular, when the native aorticvalve can be preserved. Aortic complications should be considered in any patient presenting with chest pain or pain inthe posterior thorax.Table 18 Recommendations on the management of pregnantwomen with valvular heart diseaseClassPatients with severe stenotic heart valve diseaseshould be treated before pregnancy, if possible usingpercutaneous techniques in MSEchocardiographic examination should be performed inany pregnant patient with a murmur or unexplaineddyspnoeaPatients with Marfan’s syndrome and aorticdiameter .40 mm should be treated beforepregnancyMedical therapy is favoured in most patients withregurgitant heart valve disease, even insymptomatic patientsSurgery under extracorporeal circulation should beperformed during pregnancy only in situations thatthreaten the mother’s life and are not amenable topercutaneous treatment.Vaginal delivery can be performed safely in patientswith heart valve disease who are in stablehaemodynamic condition.Warfarin is the favoured anticoagulant therapy duringthe second and third trimesters until the 36th weekaClose monitoring of anticoagulation is advised whenunfractionated heparin used.PMC should be considered in pregnant patients whohave severe symptoms or pulmonary arterypressure .50 mmHg owing to MS despite medicaltherapyWarfarin is favoured during the ﬁrst trimester if dose is5 mg/24 h, after patient informationnecessary to assess the effective adherence to anticoagulanttherapy and to check for previous complications. Cardiacauscultation during pregnancy is mandatory to detectnative valve disease or prosthesis dysfunction.Echocardiographic examination should be performed inany pregnant patient presenting with a more than trivialheart murmur, dyspnoea, or who has a prosthetic valve.Valve stenosis should be quantiﬁed using the measurementof valve area. Gradients are modiﬁed because of theincrease in cardiac output and are not reliable markers ofthe severity of stenosis; however, they have a prognosticvalue. Quantitation of regurgitation should combine different measurements and take into account loading conditions.According to the type of valve disease, echocardiographicexamination should also assess mitral valve anatomy orsize of the ascending aorta. The assessment of LV dimensionsand EF, as well as systolic pulmonary artery pressure, indicates the tolerance of the valvular disease.The use of chest X-rays should be limited and, when absolutely required, accompanied by appropriate shielding of theabdomen. CT is contraindicated because of the radiationdose, but MRI can be performed during pregnancy. The useof cardiac catheterization is restricted to the performanceof interventional procedures and again abdominal shieldingshould be used.AimsThe treatment should relieve symptoms and avoid maternalcomplications until the end of pregnancy and during delivery, without compromising foetal prognosis and subsequentgrowth. Strategies whose unique purpose is to improve longterm prognosis of the mother can be postponed until afterdelivery.Management strategyWhen the ﬁrst visit occurs during pregnancy, early termination may be considered in the following situations:Severe LV dysfunction (EF ,40%).Marfan’s syndrome with aneurysm of ascending aorta.40 mm.Severe symptomatic stenotic valve disease, which cannotbe treated using percutaneous procedures.The Task Force did not reach a full agreement on thechoice of prosthesis. However, the majority favours theuse of a bioprosthesis if valve replacement is necessaryduring pregnancy.During pregnancy, clinical and echocardiographicfollow-up should be performed at 3 and 5 months, andevery month thereafter in pregnant patients with severevalve stenosis. Symptomatic MS should be treated usingbed rest, beta-blockers, favouring atenolol or metoprolol,possibly associated with diuretics. Doses are adaptedaccording to symptoms and pulmonary artery pressure.Beta-agonist agents are contraindicated. In the case of persistent dyspnoea or pulmonary artery hypertension despitemedical therapy, PMC should be considered, in particular,when anatomical conditions are favourable or in case ofuncertainty regarding follow-up.In patients with severe AS who remain symptomaticdespite diuretics, balloon aortic valvuloplasty can be considered during pregnancy. The experience with this procedure during pregnancy is, however, much more limitedthan that of PMC.Patients with AR or MR who become symptomatic duringpregnancy should be treated medically using diuretics andvasodilators. In most cases, surgery can be postponed untilthe postoperative period.Beta-blockers should be used throughout pregnancy inpatients with Marfan’s syndrome to avoid aortic dissection.In patients with a mechanical prosthesis, vitamin K antagonists are favoured during the second and third trimestersuntil the 36th week when they are replaced by unfractionated heparin. During the ﬁrst trimester, the choice shouldtake into account patient wishes after information, adherence to treatment, and the possibility to use low-dose warfarin; the use of warfarin is the safest regimen for themother.224,229 The use of warfarin throughout pregnancyuntil the 36th week is recommended when warfarin dose is5 mg/day during the ﬁrst trimester.14 The target INR isthe same as before pregnancy. There are no data regardingthe use of other anticoagulant therapies. If unfractionatedheparin is used, we strongly recommend frequent controlof the target-activated partial thromboplastin time, whichshould be between 2 and 314. The use of LMWH cannot berecommended on the basis of the information currentlyavailable.DeliveryVaginal delivery is recommended whenever possible if thehaemodynamic condition is stable at the end of pregnancy.Haemodynamic monitoring is recommended in women withsevere MS or LV dysfunction. The use of epidural analgesiaand obstetric procedures to shorten extraction time arerecommended to reduce the total duration of labour, diminishing haemodynamic consequences. Caesarean section hasthe advantage of avoiding the haemodynamic consequencesof labour, but it is associated with other consequencesrelated to anaesthesia, blood volume shift, and assisted ventilation, which can be harmful from a haemodynamic pointof view. It requires close haemodynamic monitoring andshould be ideally performed in specialized centres. It ismainly considered in patients who have ’s syndrome,with an aortic diameter .40 mm, those in whom haemodynamic conditions are unstable, in particular, in the presence of AS, or in case of premature delivery under oralanticoagulation. Prophylactic antibiotic therapy can begiven at the beginning of labour and during delivery inpatients at high risk, i.e. with previous endocarditis orheart valve prosthesis.When valvular surgery is required during pregnancy,caesarean section should be performed ﬁrst if the foetusis viable. In the other cases, the mode of delivery shouldbe discussed and planned by cardiologists, obstetricians,anaesthetists, and the patient before delivery, evenmore so for the patients who need to interrupt oralanticoagulation.MethodsThe use of medical therapy should always take into accountfoetal hazards. Beta-blockers are safe but may induce neonatal bradycardia and possible growth retardation.Diuretics can be used at the lowest dose possible to avoidimpairing foetal perfusion. The use of vasodilators shouldtake into account the contraindication of ACE-inhibitorsand angiotensin receptor blockers.Valvular surgery under cardiopulmonary bypass is associated with a foetal mortality between 20 and 30%.231Percutaneous valvular dilatation can be performed duringpregnancy after the 20th week. It should be performed inexperienced centres and associated with speciﬁc precautions to shorten the procedure and reduce the hazards ofradiation, in particular, using abdominal shield protection.232 TEE guidance is useful in addition to, but notinstead of ﬂuoroscopy.